

Lesson l 
Stress and Fatigue 

AGKOl 
Stress and Fatigue 
Stress and Fatigue 
Aircraft are subject to stress whether they are flying, taxiing or just parked on the ground. In this chapter we will briefly consider the types of stresses involved, the design specifications laid down by the authorities to mitigate risk. Finally,.we consider strategies used by designers and maintenance engineers to meet the design specifications. 
The forces of lift, weight, thrust and drag acting on an aircraft create stresses in the aircraft structure. Stress is the internal force per unit area inside a structural part as a result of external loads, mathematically expressed as the force divided by the cross­sectional area to which it is applied. When stress is applied it causes strain which we witness when the shape of an object changes when being bent, stretched or squashed. Strain is defined as the amount of deformation in the direction of the applied force divided by the initial length ofthe material. Put simply, strain is the deformation resulting from stress. 
Stresses can either be twisting or torsion stresses, tension, compression or shear. These stresses can act individually or together. Bending a structure, for instance, creates tension on the outside and compression on the inside. 
High compression loads can cause buckling of a structure. 

ft.ihi-l o 
---,--­
i 

---t +--­


Stress and Fatigue 
Stress and Fatigue continued 
When a sufficient load is applied to a metal or other structural material it will change shape. This change in shape is called deformation. A temporary shape change that is self-reversing after the force is removed is called elastic deformation. When the stress is sufficient to permanently deform the metal it is called plastic deformation. 
Stress may be applied as a single long-term load, say when the aircraft is parked. For example, the weight of the aeroplane is taken by the undercarriage, and the weight of the fuselage is borne by the wing root. However, for aircraft in use, most loads are dynamic or cyclical. Dynamic loads are those that are applied and released, for example the occasional application of high 'g'. Cyclical loads are also dynamic in nature but occur in frequently repeated patterns such as the loads exerted on a fuselage when pressurised, loads on the undercarriage on landing or loads experienced by the whole aircraft during turbulence. The examples given are low frequency loads higher frequency but lower amplitude loads result from propeller or engine vibration. 

ft+i.i-lo 


TENSION COMPRESSION 

+--+ 

SHEAR 
Tension outside of bend 
... 
t 
Compression inside of bend BENDING 


St ress and Fatigue 

ftiihi-lo 
Stress and System Failure 
The stress at which the structure fails is called the ultimate stress. This is the fail point for a single application of a static load. In flight the structure is loaded and unloaded many times at levels below the ultimate stress. In metals, this causes cumulative damage which in turn allows the structure to fail catastrophically at a stress level well below ultimate stress. This cumulative damage and weakening of the structure due to cyclical loading is called metal fatigue. 
In metal structures failures usually occur under tensile stress, for example on the bottom surface of a wing that is being bent upwards. The failures usually start as cracks at the points of concentrated stress, such as rivet holes, machining marks, sharp corners and screw threads. 
Composite structures also suffer from fatigue damage, but react in a different way. Composites "soft fail" as the fibres break. 
Visual detection of fatigue in composites is limited, therefore more sophisticated non-destructive testing is normally necessary. 


St ress and Fatigue 
Structural Mass Limitations 
There are several definitions that are important when considering structural mass limitations on aircraft. You will meet them in several other areas of your studies, but it is worth repeating four of them here, as they do appear in the EASA learning objectives for this subject. 
¦ 
Maximum ramp mass -the structural limitation of the mass of the aeroplane at commencement of taxi. 

¦ 
Maximum take-off mass -the maximum permissible total aeroplane mass at the start of the take-off run. 

¦ 
Maximum zero fuel mass -the maximum permissible mass of an aeroplane with no usable fuel. 

¦ 
Maximum landing mass-the maximum permissible total aeroplane mass on landing in normal circumstances. 



Stress and Fatigue 
The S/N Curve 
The relationship between repeated applications of stress and the gradual degradation of the safe stress level is given by the S/N Curve. This is a plot of the number oftimes and degrees of stress applied and shows what percentage of the original ultimate stress will cause catastrophic failure for a given fatigue history. 
The designers now assess the stress and the S/N forecast for the aircraft -taken from the forecast flight profiles, weights and loading -and design a structure that should be safe for the life of the aircraft. If the aircraft is operated in an entirely different manner from the original design, for instance short haul instead of long haul, then this will affect the life of the aircraft and the planned servicing and spares holdings. 

ft.iffi-lo 
Q)
1ii s 
E 
E 
::l 
0 
-
~ 80 
(/) (/) 
~ 
(/) 
-



g1 50 
:.:; 
ra 
C:
... 
2 30
"ii:i j 20 C. 
c.. 
<( 
N 
Number of cycles to failure 
St ress and Fatigue 
Stress Concentration Factor 
Stresses need to be spread evenly rather than concentrated in one point. If they are concentrated, the effects can be catastrophic. To consider the problem, imagine trying to split a log for firewood. A hammer, no matter how large, will never split the wood as effectively as an axe or a splitting wedge, as the stresses are not concentrated with the hammer, but they certainly are with the axe. 
An often-cited example of the stress concentration factor is the 'square' windows on the de Havilland Comet, a British built airliner. Shortly after entering service in the early 1950s three Comets suffered three catastrophic structural failures in flight, resulting in the whole fleet being grounded. This image shows the ADF antenna apertures, which also had square corners, from the upper surface of Comet G-AL YP, which crashed in January 1954. 
The problem was that the stresses were concentrated in the corners of the square windows and other apertures, though this was not sufficiently understood at the time. Wreckage painstakingly pieced together by investigators eventually pointed to the corners as the points of failure. It was later calculated that 70% of the aircraft's ultimate stress was concentrated on the corners of the windows. 

ftiiii-lo 

After extensive re-design with oval windows, the Comet was returned to airworthiness some four years later, but by then Boeing had cornered the airliner market with the 707, which could carry twice as many passengers as the Comet. 
Stress and Fatigue 
Other Factors Affecting Fatigue 
The manner is which the aircraft is operated has a marked influence on its fatigue life. Type of flight manoeuvres, excessive use of 'g', flight in turbulence, low level flight, frequent changes in engine power, high zero fuel weights, all serve to reduce fatigue life. Where the aircraft is based or operated also has effects, for example, coastal air is not only humid but contains corrosive salts. Temperature too plays a part as warm air encourages corrosion, so we find aircraft based in warm coastal areas such as Florida are more prone to corrosion fatigue than perhaps an aircraft based in Central Europe. 
Reducing Fatigue 
It should be clear from all this that an aircraft's fatigue life can be greatly extended if stress levels are kept low. This means smooth flying, avoiding high g, avoiding turbulence and going easy on the power. Weight is a critical factor. Increasing aircraft all-up weight by 1 % can increase fatigue life consumption by 5%. 
If operating in contaminated areas regular aircraft washes should be scheduled. For example, the RAF Nimrod which flew long sorties low over the sea frequently taxied through a wash bay on landing. Furthermore, components known to be prone to corrosion are inspected more regularly and it goes without saying, the quality of the maintenance is paramount. 




ft+Hi-lo 
Corrosive Materials 
Corrosive materials are a part of the aircraft. Battery fluids, particularly sulphuric acid is highly corrosive as well as being a hazard to humans. Hydraulic fluids damage protective surfaces, leaving them prone to corrosion. Fuel and hydraulic contaminated surfaces damage tyres. Mercury, still around on some older aircraft but no longer used on modern aircraft, readily forms an amalgam with aluminium, weakening the structure within minutes. When these items are carried as freight they are classified as Dangerous Goods. 
Stress and Fatigue 
Certification Requirements 
The design requirements for aircraft are set out in the Certification Specifications, which are issued by the competent authorities such as EASA: 
¦ 
CS25 Large aeroplanes 

¦ 
CS23 Light aeroplanes 

1. 
Normal, Utility, Aerobatic aeroplanes with a MTOM of 5670 kg (12 500 lb) or less and 

2. 
Propeller-driven twin-engine aeroplanes in the commuter category, excluding the pilot seat(s) of nineteen or fewer and a MTOM of 8618 kg (19 000 lb) or less 



¦ 
Very similar, if not identical, documents exist in other states. In the US, for instance, FAR25 mirrors CS25 and FAR23 matches CS23. This is unsurprising, as it is logical for aircraft to be designed and built to a global standard, as they are likely to be operating globally. 


The Design Specifications cover a host of aspects such as design, material quality and build quality and behavioural characteristics 


ft++tiilo 
European Aviation Safety Agency 

Stress and Fatigue 

ft+EH-lo 
Level of Certification 
The table shows the certification safety objectives associated with failure conditions. 
There is a direct link between the probability of a failure and the severity of the effects. The more severe the effect of a failure, then the probability of that failure happening must be kept more remote by design. 
To keep within these limits, systems are often duplicated, or even triplicated, on aircraft. 
Classification No safety of Failure Minor Major Hazardous effect

Conditions Probability per No probability I 

<10., 
<10-s <10., 
flight hour requirement 

Slight No effect on reduction in Effect on 
operat_1onal functional aeroplane 
caf~b1llt1es or [ i:ipabilities or -~sa e Y T ety margins 
Effect on occupants 

. Physical excluding flight 
lnconvenien+ce discomfort crew 
-
Effect on flight 

No effect on Slight increase crew 
flight crew in workload 
-
Qualitative No probabi~:vi

ity Probable probability 

requirement Significant reduction in functional capabilities or safety margins 
Physical distress, possibly including injuries 
Physical discomfort or a significant increase in workload 
Remote 
Large reduction in 
functional capabilities or safe! marg~ 
Serious or fatal 
injury to a small number of passengers or cabin er~ 
Physical distress or excessive workload impairs ability to perform tasks Extremely remote 
Catastrophic 
<10-9 
Normally with hull loss 
Multiple fatalities 
l 
Fatalities or incapacitation 
Extremely improbable I 
Stress and Fatigue 
Design Strategies 
Aircraft design is one of compromise: how to make the aircraft meet the Certification Specifications yet be as light as possible. Many strategies are used but we only need to know of a few of them here. 
Fail Safe 
Fail safe design is one in which a component can fail, and another is able to take its load. Clearly to achieve this there needs to be at least one other path. Critical components, say flight or engine controls, may have triple paths. An electrical failure would cause major problems on modern computer driven aircraft so there are multiple ways in which electrical power can be restored. 
Another term used to describe this is redundancy. 


Safe Life 
For some components it's not practical to employ a fail-safe strategy. Instead a safe life philosophy is used. Undercarriages are a good example they are heavy items not required for flight, so they need to be kept to a minimum. Undercarriages are normally 'lifed' on number of cycles i.e. number of landings. The idea of safe-life being that the item will not fail within its safe life, and once the life is used it becomes life expired and the component is replaced with a new or reconditioned item. Depending on the function of a component it may be 'lifed' according to flight hours, running hours, landings, or by calendar. 
Damage Tolerance 
Some parts of the aircraft are prone to damage either in flight or during ground handling leading edges, undercarriages, tyres and wing tips are examples. To protect against this a principle of damage tolerance must be included in structural design based on the capability to withstand a certain amount of damage to structural parts until the damage is detected during inspection. 
St ress and Fatigue 

ftiiiifilo 
Maintenance Strategies 
Maintenance is really an ongoing part of the design strategy to ensure the safety of the aircraft. Here we mention a couple of techniques. 
Hard Time/Fixed Time 
Hard time maintenance equates to safe-life components that are replaced after a prescribed number of cycles or hours. Hard time is sometimes referred to as Fixed time. 
On Condition/Condition Monitoring 
Aircraft have scheduled maintenance when components are inspected. If an item fails to meet the critical parameters, it is replaced. Scheduled maintenance varies from daily inspection such as pre-flight, to major servicing when the aircraft is out of service for a long period. 
A deviation of On Condition occurs when a defect is found but a decision is made to delay the repair to align it with a scheduled servicing, in this case the component is monitored at regular intervals this becomes Condition Monitoring. 
Some items are subject to more than one strategy. An example might be tyres they become worn but continue in use until either life expired (hard time) or worn to limits (on condition). 


St ress and Fatigue 
Pilot's Walk Around 
The pilot's walk around is a vital part of the maintenance inspection programme. It is the last chance to save your life and you might be surprised or even shocked at what is occasionally found during this inspection. 
As well as a general look around, the inspection targets specific threat areas. Without specialist equipment you are limited to basic visual inspection. In terms of structure mentioned in this chapter, you are looking for damage which might show as dents or scratched paintwork and wear and tear of tyres. 
You might be surprised that rivets can wear, particularly when subject to vibration. Such wear is indicated by 'fretting', meaning that the panel is becoming loose. It is most easily detected by oily streaks coming from the rivets. 
You are also looking for corrosion. The signs on ferrous base materials are reddish stains, aluminium produces a greyish powder. Paintwork can hide corrosion but there are still signs the paint may have blisters or thin wormlike trails highlighting filiform corrosion. Unpainted surfaces may be pitted. 


As well as corrosion, you are looking for cracks. You might be surprised that prior to the Aloha incident a passenger noticed a crack but didn't say anything. Why had no one else noticed? 
Finally, from a structural perspective you are looking for faulty attachment, loose panels being one the more frequent issues. The author once had an engine not properly bolted so it was loose! 


Stress and Fatigue 

IVli:ILt:J li:11~ 
The ideal material for aircraft structures would have the following properties: 
• 
Low density . 

• 
High strength . 

• 
High stiffness. 

• 
Good corrosion resistance . 

• 
Good fatigue performance . 

• 
High operating temperature . 

• 
Ease of fabrication . 

• 
Low cost 


No one material has all these properties. In the construction of an aircraft a variety of materials may be used to meet the requirements of a particular structure. The designer must consider whether, for example, he wants high rigidity (stiffness or plasticity), or flexibility (elasticity) in a component. Or whether the material offered has the correct strength-to-density ratio to achieve the desired outcome. 
Early aircraft used wood with fabric covering for the main structure with metal fittings at critical points. In the 1920s and '30s steel and aluminium replaced the wooden frame but the fabric covering remained. 



I 
Advances in metallurgy eventually led to aluminium alloys that were light yet had similar properties to steel. Engine design advanced in parallel and, as more thrust became available, all­metal aircraft were eventually built. 
Stress and Fatigue 
Aluminium and Aluminium Alloys 
Aluminium is less dense than steel, has good corrosion resistance but is relatively weak. Aluminium alloys are stronger but have worse corrosion resistance. 
Duralumin is a common aluminium alloy in aircraft structures which was invented in the USA in 1909. It may contain about 3% or 4% copper, 0.5% to 1 % manganese, 0.5% to 1 ˝% magnesium, and, in some formulations, a little silicon. 
Duralumin alloys are relatively soft and workable in the normal state. They may be rolled, forged, extruded, or drawn into a variety of shapes and products. After heat treatment and ageing these alloys are comparable to soft steel in strength and hardness. Once manufactured, duralumin is sensitive to temperature and should not be heated above 120°C. 
This makes duralumin unsuitable for welding and prevents its use for aircraft operating above the speed of sound where surface temperatures can rise above this level. Although restricted by operating temperatures, duralumin has good thermal conductivity, and being metal also conducts electricity. 
Duralumin has poor resistance to corrosion. To overcome this, a thin layer of pure aluminium or a corrosion-resistant aluminium alloy is used to cover the duralumin core. These special laminated sheets are called Alclad and it is in this form that duralumin is most used for aircraft construction. 
In summary, the advantages of duralumin are: 
• 
low density 

• 
high strength 

• 
high stiffness 

• 
fatigue tolerant 

• 
ease of fabrication 

• 
good thermal conductivity and 

• 
low cost. The disadvantages are: 

• 
poor corrosion resistance and 

• 
low operating temperature. 


Stress and Fatigue 
Magnesium Alloys 
Magnesium alloys are less dense than aluminium but have very low operating temperatures and a high susceptibility to corrosion. Magnesium alloys should only be used where they can be easily inspected. 
Titanium Alloys 
Titanium alloys are expensive and difficult to work but are extremely strong and will sustain operating temperatures up to 400°C. Titanium is used for engine firewalls and other critical components such as helicopter rotor heads. Titanium can be welded with electron beams. 
Monel 
Monel is an alloy of copper and nickel with small amounts of iron and manganese. Monel alloy's high resistance to corrosion, its low coefficient of expansion and its high strength make it useful for certain applications like the exhaust system for aircraft engines. 
Honeycomb Materials 
The conventional method of fixing metal structures is riveting or bolting. In the 1940s epoxy adhesive metal-to-metal bonding came into use, and is still widely used in aircraft construction. A spin-off from this was the development of"honeycomb" materials, where a cellular fill is bonded between two sheets of metal to give a light but stiff structure. 
Aluminium skin (made transparent to show core) 
Aluminium skin 
Aluminium honeycomb core 
Adhesive 


Stress and Fatigue 
Honeycomb Materials continued 
Tapered Core 
The core itself is weak but stabilises the outer skins and produces a light yet strong torsional structure. The main function of the core material is to stabilise the covering sheets. A honeycomb or sandwich structure is unsuitable for absorbing concentrated 
Core 
loads, and extra protection is required if the structure is to be 
Skin 
subjected to such loads. 
Honeycomb panels are often used for floor surfaces in an aircraft, with the seat mounting rails bonded to the sandwich to help spread the loads. Cargo floors need load-spreaders to avoid 
Skin 
damaging the sandwich panels, as they do not cope well with concentrated stresses. Control surfaces are frequently constructed of honeycomb. 

Stress and Fatigue 
Composites 
Composites are generally used because they have desirable properties which cannot be achieved by the individual components alone. The most common example is a fibrous composite consisting of reinforcing fibres embedded in a binder or matrix material. The idea is not new: the Old Testament book of Genesis refers to clay bricks reinforced with straw. 
Modern composites uses a polymer matrix (also known as resin or filler) reinforced by fibres. The fibres can be glass or aramid (Kevlar), but the most commonly used are carbon fibres, which have the best tensile strength to weight ratio. Aircraft manufacturers are rapidly turning away from metal structures because of the advantages of composites, particularly with regards to strength to weight ratio. 
The fibres can be laid in a random pattern, which gives a material with the same bending strength in any direction. Alternatively, fibres can be laid in one direction to give great bending strength along the fibre run but a much lower strength across the run. In this way, the bending response ofthe material can be tailored exactly to the designer's needs, a fact which becomes important when we deal with the wing bending response of swept wing aircraft. 


Composites may need conductive elements embedded in them to achieve the correct path through for lightning strikes. They may also have reflective elements embedded in them behind mounts for radio antennas. 
Another advantage of composites is their multiple path loads, making them inherently more resistant to fatigue. They are also considered to be 'soft fail' as any failures in the fibres should be detectable long before they become critical. Naturally, being non­metallic they offer excellent corrosion resistance and are very cost effective. 
One disadvantage of composites is that they are very susceptible to damage which is difficult to detect. Metals dent when impacted, giving a visual clue without suffering much loss of strength. It is not the same for composites because the internal fibres can be damaged, causing considerable weakening while no surface damage is visible. The best way to detect damage is by non­destructive testing (NOT) however, this is expensive and time consuming. An in-service technique frequently employed is the tap test which can detect the presence of many defects in composite materials. The person conducting the tap test simply taps the surface with a coin or small hammer and notes any change in acoustic response suggesting an area of damage. Obviously, this must be conducted in a quiet zone. 
Stress and Fatigue 


Attachment and Joining 
Aircraft materials are attached and joined in much the same way as materials in other industries. Bolts are strong, but heavy, and are not normally used in forming structures. However, they are commonly used to attach items to structures, or indeed to attach one piece of structure to another. 
Riveting is very common, where relatively soft metal rivets are 
0  I I I o : I I o : I o : I I I  I I : o : o : o : o : o I I I  'I I I I I I I I I I I I I I  

deformed to hold two pieces of skin together. Solid rivets as 
shown in the image have the domed surface already formed, and the flat surface deformed by direct pressure from a rivet hammer to close the joint. Blind rivets are used where the interior of the structure is not accessible -commonly called 'pop' rivets. 

One Three Five Continuous Bolt Solid Blind Bond Bonding is very common in modern aircraft construction, where an Rivets Rivets adhesive substance is applied to one or both surfaces to be joined. Bonding is very reliable nowadays with advanced adhesive technology and has the advantage of not leading to stress concentration. 
Screwing may be used on light items such as panelling. 
Pinning (like nailing) may be used for non-load bearing items such as cabin trim, but not for any critical structures. 



Stress and Fatigue 
Corrosion results from the fact that most metals will try to revert to their natural and more stable state. Although there are a number of reactions that can take place between metals and their environment, they may broadly be divided into two categories: oxidation and electrolytical. 
Oxidation, or dry corrosion, is the reaction between a metal and its environment without the intervention of an electrolyte. 
Electrolytical, or wet corrosion, requires an electrolyte which conducts electricity, such as impure water. A potential difference exists between dissimilar metals of two surfaces, or two areas of the same surface, the electrolyte provides the current path. One of the areas becomes anodic(+) and the other area becomes cathodic(-). The anodic area usually corrodes while the cathodic are has material added to it. 
If a structure is subjected to corrosion and fatigue then stress corrosion, or stress corrosion cracking can occur. In 1988 the Aloha Airlines Flight 243, a Boeing 737 suffered a failure in the fuselage due to metal fatigue exacerbated by crevice corrosion in an overlap joint. Sadly, a flight attendant was killed in the resulting explosive decompression, and her body was never found. Amazingly, there were no other fatalities in this accident. Another remarkable fact is that an embarking passenger noticed cracking near the forward doorway, but did not think to mention it to anyone. 





Lesson 2 
Airframe Design 

AGK02 
Airframe Design 

ft+i&frlo 
Aircraft Configuration 
In this lesson we consider the structure of aircraft fuselages, wings, empennages, doors and windows. 
The structure of the conventional aeroplane can be broken down into three major sub-sections. The fuselage carries the crew, cargo and passengers the wings provide lift and the empennage (the fin and the tailplane) provide stabilisation. 
As aircraft design has advanced, these distinctions have become blurred in the search for efficiency. Most passenger aircraft rely on the fuselage shape to provide some of the lift, stabilising surfaces have been combined into V tails, and extreme designs such as the American 82 combine all the features into a flying wing. 
Where the functions of control surfaces are combined so are the names. Elevons are combination ailerons and elevators fitted to the outer wing, tailerons are the same things but fitted to the tail. Flaperons are a combination flap and aileron used mostly on light aircraft and fighters. 
Fuel is usually carried in the wing but is often carried in fuselage tanks, particularly on large aircraft and, occasionally, even in the fin. 
Wing trailing edge 
I 
Wing leading edge 
Tailplane (l shown) or Stabilator 
ng root 

Engine nacelle Main 
l 
plane Wing tip 
Airframe Design 

ft+iifto 
Fuselage Design 
Early aircraft were built of a fabric covered wooden frame. Three or four long wooden struts called longerons ran the length of the fuselage. The longerons were held apart by compression struts or bracing struts forming individual 'bays' which were in turn cross braced with tie-bars or wire. This is also known as truss construction. The frame of a structure like this carries the entire structural load. The fabric skin is purely for aerodynamic efficiency. 
Later versions of the braced fuselage used steel rather than wood. The structure was bolted together in the early years rather than welded as welding reduced the strength of the joint. As lighter and more easily welded steel became available in the late 1930s welded structures became the norm. 

Airframe Design 
Fuselages may incorporate any or all of the following structural components, dependent upon the design. 
Frames, as the name implies, are components that form a framework for the attachment offurther components. In a fuselage, a frame is a cross sectional component, giving the shape and form. 
Square or rectangular cross sections are ideal for accommodating passenger and freight, unfortunately it would need to be very heavy to deal with the stresses of pressurisation. A circular cross section would be ideal for pressurised aircraft but it's not so good at accommodating passengers and freight, so most aircraft are a compromise and deviate from circular oval being the most common. The B747 incorporates the double bubble which relies on two circles, which may be of different radii, intersecting at a common point usually at a floor or deck. The floor takes tension holding the two bubbles together. The A380 features a triple bubble. The shape of the fuselage will be determined by the task for which the aircraft is being designed. In increasing order of suitability for pressurised cabins the shapes are rectangular, flat bottomed circle, double bubble, oval and circular, as shown opposite. 
A bulkhead (a term borrowed from shipbuilding) implies a cross sectional form like the frame, but usually solid. We shall meet forward and aft pressure bulkheads shortly when we discuss 




ft+it+lo 
11 
L_J ...................... . 
08······················ 0 0 
Stiffeners are components that provide extra rigidity or reduced flexibility wherever that is required. Doublers are like stiffeners. They act to carry loads at critical points by 'doubling' and sometimes 'trebling' the skin thickness at such points. Doubler and trebler plates reduce in size as their load-carrying function is no longer required, thus blending the load path and reducing unnecessary weight. 
Airframe Design 
Fuselage Structural Components continued 
Doubler plates can be seen clearly at the tail boom and fin junction on the helicopter in the image. 
Stringers and longerons are longitudinal components. They connect frames, ribs and bulkheads to form the shape ofthe fuselage. The terms have become almost interchangeable, though strictly a longeron runs the whole length of the fuselage. 
Skin usually refers to the outside covering of the aircraft, formed upon the framework described above. Stressed skin will be discussed shortly. 
Crossbeams fitted laterally across the fuselage carry floor loads. The floor panels may be sandwich panels, as already discussed. 
The last general component to be discussed before we look at various types of fuselage is the firewall. As the name implies, firewalls are designed to resist intense heat. They may take the form of a bulkhead between an engine and the rest of the aircraft, or they may take the form of a tunnel or channel to carry critical services such as flight control runs, fuel and hydraulic lines past areas of high fire risk, for example engine bays. 
Airframe Design 
ft.ii+lo 
Monocoque Fuselages 
Monocoque
A true monocoque structure relies on the shape of the outer skin ofthe aircraft for strength and can be recognised by the absence Skin 
of a load carrying internal structure. Some early wooden aircraft utilising plywood were described as being monocoque even though they had some internal frames. Later aircraft either use alloys of aluminium, magnesium and titanium or composite materials. 
The ideal cross section is circular and the shape is maintained by circular formers and longitudinal stringers. This stressed skin structure can only be built from light, strong and easily worked materials. 
The disadvantage of pure monocoque structures is that they 

depend too heavily on their shape for strength. Any damage or deformation weakens the structure and can eventually lead to failure. 
Airframe Design 

ft+H+lo 
Semi-Monocoque Fuselages 
Semimonocoque 
Semi-monocoque fuselages include some of the features of the frame structure with some of the features of a pure monocoque Skin 
structure. This results in a design where the skin only takes part of the load and allows fuselages to be other than circular in cross section. 
A semi-monocoque structure uses bulkheads and formers to support the load bearing skin and the longitudinal stringers are more robust to take some of the tensile and compression load. Frame structures like the cabins of light aircraft can be included in the design. 


Airframe Design 


ft+H+lo 
Machined Skins 
As the skin carries more of the load in monocoque and semi-monocoque structures it becomes necessary to move away from a simple uniform sheet skin, early semi-monocoque aircraft like the JU52 used corrugated skins for extra strength. In more modern aircraft large areas of skin are machined on the underside in complex patterns to carry the varying loads. For some very convoluted patterns chemical etching has replaced milling to form the internal skin profile. 
Machined inner skin 
Airframe Design 
Reinforced Shell Fuselages 
The final development of semi-monocoque structures is called a reinforced shell. The basic structure is stressed skin with skin shape being defined by frames, bulkheads and stringers but now reinforced with longerons. Where openings are made for windows and doors a frame is fitted around the hole which is bolted, riveted or welded to the frame. 

Bonded doubler 
Frame 



ft++++lo 

Where weak points such as window openings occur the structure around them is strengthened with additional straps called doublers. Doublers can be either riveted or bonded to the main structure. 
The floor panels are normally suspended on cross beams. 
Airframe Design 
Pressurisation Loads 
Modern transport aircraft have pressurised cabins to allow passengers and crew to breathe normally at high altitudes without having to wear breathing apparatus. The pressure inside the cabin is maintained at a higher pressure than outside. Doors and windows are designed to open inwards, so when the aircraft is pressurised they are forced into their apertures forming airtight seals. 
The loads caused by pressurisation can be split into axial or longitudinal loads and hoop or radial stresses. The fuselage ends are sealed by the forward and aft pressure bulkheads leaving the nose in front ofthe pilots and the tail cone unpressurised. The pressurisation loads are applied once each flight and it makes little difference whether the aircraft stays at height for one hour or ten. Because of this, the number of pressurisations, called the pressurisation cycles, are recorded along with the flight time. 
If an aircraft suffers a tail strike on take-off or landing apart from the obvious possibility of fuselage damage, the aft pressure bulkhead may also be damaged. 
ft+W+lo 


Pressurisation loads are one reason why it is not always straightforward to convert a long haul aircraft to short haul operations -the aircraft may end up with a significantly shorter life. 

Airframe Design 
The Wings 
The wings of a modern aircraft are of a cantilever design, that is to say they are self-supporting and do not require external bracing or wires. The structure is stressed skin with a rigid beam called a spar running the full span ofthe wing, many aircraft have two or three spars in the wing. The spar may be designed to run the full length of the wing, full span, or may be assembled in half span sections and bolted together. Wing spars can be girders or box section. 
One type of spar is called an 'I beam spar'. This has two horizontal members, called 'girders', joined by a vertical component, called 'the web'. Together, they form an I shape in cross section. 
The aerodynamic shape ofthe wing is maintained by ribs in the classic aerofoil shape which run fore and aft and stringers which run along the wing. Ribs correspond to the frames used to define the shape of a stressed skin fuselage. Cavities in the wing are designed to carry fuel, either in flexible tanks or sealed into the structure itself. 
The forces on the skin are transmitted by the ribs and stringers to the spars which ultimately take the load. This diagram shows a wing with three spars, ribs and stringers. 

Wing construction Rear spar 
Ribs 
Wing leading edge 
Skin 
Front spar 

The skin between the spars has been corrugated to increase its strength and would have another layer of thin metal over the top. The spars and the stressed skin now form a box section called a torsion box that is very rigid and resistant to twisting. 
Main / centre spar 
Airframe Design 
Wing Loads 
The main loads on a wing are bending loads, incorporating tension and compression, both in flight and on the ground. In flight the weight of the aircraft is supported by the lift of the wings, on the ground by the landing gear. Although the normal loads tend to bend the wing upwards, on landing and in turbulence the wing flexes downwards so the spar has to take bending loads in both directions. The load is at a maximum at the wing root. 
The primary bending and shear loads are controlled by observing 'g' and loading limits, in particular the Maximum Zero Fuel Mass (MZFM). This manufacturer's limit ignores the effect of fuel load in the wings. It ensures that the value of maximum bending of the wing at the wing root is not exceeded at the designed maximum load factor ('g') of the aircraft. Although it is mainly concerned with the weight of the fuselage the MZFM is defined for convenience as the maximum permissible aircraft weight disregarding fuel. 
The forces on the spar are, however, affected by the amount of fuel in the wing. Some aircraft have special fuel management procedures which keep fuel in the outboard tanks to balance the lift and reduce the fatigue loads on the wing root. Wing loading may also be reduced by uprigging the ailerons, by causing them to produce less lift in their 'at rest' position. 

Fuel &engine  
Lift  moment reduce  
Maximum bending at wing root  bending moment of lift  




Weight 

Twisting or torsional loads caused by shifts in the centre of gravity and centre of pressure and by control surface deflection are also present as are shear loads on the centre section of the main spar, particularly if half span spars are bolted to a centre box section. 
Airframe Design 
Aeroelastic Flutter 
Aeroelastic flutter is defined as 'an unstable, self-excited structural oscillation at a definite frequency where energy is extracted from the airstream by the motion of the structure'. Flutter results from the interaction between 3 forces 1. inertial forces, 2. elastic forces and 3. aerodynamic forces. Ifthe combination of these forces is wrong, then an oscillation occurs at the natural resonant frequency of the structure which is divergent in nature i.e. it gets stronger and stronger until the structure breaks. Flutter normally affects the wings or empennage but sometimes it affects the whole aircraft. 
Clearly, flutter must be designed out of aircraft and a part of the flight-testing process is to check that the aircraft is not prone to flutter when operated within limits. How can it be designed out? Answer: change one of the interacting forces. 

c-~(;-------~ 


Airframe Design 
Aeroelastic Flutter continued 
Inertial forces can be changed by altering either the mass of the structure or the distribution of mass within the structure: a heavy structure resonates at a lower frequency, conversely a light wing is susceptible to higher frequency oscillations. In aircraft, the positioning of wing mounted engines forward of the centre of pressure is key moving the mass forward along the chord line is a chord-wise countermeasure. Additionally, positioning the mass along the span i.e. how far outboard are the engines mounted is a span-wise countermeasure. Fuel distribution can als be used to position the mass. 
Fuel may therefore be retained in the outboard tanks not only to reduce the stress on the spar but also to reduce the onset of flutter. Note that on swept wing aircraft, moving fuel outboard also moves it backwards, in this case fuel is moved both spanwise and chordwise directions. In older aircraft fuel distribution was managed by the flight engineer in modern aircraft it tends to be automatic. 
In aircraft with either manual or power assisted flight controls an oscillation of the control surface can occur leading to wing flutter. Positioning the C of G of the control surface forward of the hinge prevents flutter mass balances are used for this purpose. The previously mentioned forward mounting of engine pods is, in effect, using the engine as a mass balance for the wing. 

Airframe Design 

Aeroelastic Flutter continued 
Elastic forces relate to wing stiffness, the resonant frequency can be altered by stiffness. Interestingly stiffness may be viewed as 
Aerodynamic centre (ac) 
Up rigging of ailerons
resistance to bending and/or resistance to twisting known as torsional stiffness. 

Aerodynamic forces are largely to do with the air mass the aircraft is flying in and speed for a given structure there is a speed X

at which flutter is most likely to occur. In aircraft, designers 

Fuel in wings 
attempt to have that speed outside of the operation range of the 
increases mass 
aircraft. lfflutter starts to occur, change your speed. 
Point of flexing moved closer to AC reduces momentarm X


Airframe Design 
When operating a multi-engine aircraft an engine failure imposes a new combination of loads on the aircraft. The thrust from the remaining engine, now offset from the centreline of the aircraft, creates a moment arm which yaws the aircraft towards the dead engine. Not only is the thrust offset but the failed engine produces drag which is offset from the centreline. The secondary effect of yaw is to roll the aircraft towards the dead engine. On propeller driven aircraft the failed engine results in lower airflow over that wing which means a loss of lift on that side which adds to the roll. If these forces are not handled correctly the aircraft will rapidly spiral out of control. 
The pilot counteracts the yaw by applying opposite rudder which adds to the drag. If the pilot applies aileron to combat the roll that too adds to the drag. The aircraft now sideslips which further adds to the drag. You might understand that with the increase in drag available thrust becomes an issue: for most light twins it becomes a serious issue. 
If the aircraft is flying slowly the rudder may not create enough force to overcome the yaw so you will find you have a minimum speed at which you can maintain directional control. In this situation it would be easy for the pilot to apply too much rudder leading to fin stall which is likely to be catastrophic. 
A more detailed description of asymmetric flight can be found in the Principles of Flight Manual. 


Wings may be mounted under the fuselage (low), through the fuselage (mid) or above the fuselage (high). 
Airliners generally employ a low wing mounting. This works well for jet engine aircraft and keeps the fuselage fairly close to the ground meaning the undercarriage legs are short saving weight. The whole fuselage can be used for passengers or freight. 
High wing mounting is more frequently associated with propeller driven aircraft as it provides ground clearance for long propeller blades. It is also favoured by cargo carrying aircraft as it allows the fuselage to be very close to the ground allowing vehicles to be driven into the aircraft via a ramp at the back of the aircraft. 
Mid mounted wings are normally associated with fast jets where the fuselage is not needed for passengers or freight. This structurally stronger method helps with high 'g' manoeuvres. 
Airframe Design 
Empennages 
An empennage serves two functions. It provides directional stability and control in yaw, and longitudinal stability and control in pitch. Directional stability is provided by the fin, and pitch stability is provided by the horizontal stabiliser. 
Traditionally an empennage is split into a vertical surface, the fin, with the rudder attached and a horizontal stabilizer or tailplane with the elevators attached. 
Empennages are constructed in the same way and carry the same type of loads as the wing structure. 
Tailplane position is affected by the stall characteristics of the aircraft and the desire to keep the tailplane away from the wing vortices at low speeds. A low set tailplane has the best stall characteristics because the tailplane moves into undisturbed air as the aircraft pitch increases in the stall. It is most commonly found on fighter aircraft with fuselage mounted engines: however, it is rarely seen on commercial aircraft where wing mounted engines would leave the tailplane in the jet efflux. For this reason, commercial aircraft generally employ mid mounted tailplanes. The disadvantage of mid mounted tailplanes is that they are under the influence of downwash from the wings cruciform mounting, placing the tailplane a little higher, can overcome the downwash issue. 

High mounted tail plane is kept clear of turbulence of the wing 

a 

'T' tail reduces vortices at tip of fin, increasing efficiency of the fin 



Airframe Design 

a 
Empennages continued 
T-tails have the advantage of presenting undisturbed air to the tailplane they also avoid the efflux of rear fuselage mounted engines. However, when coupled with a wing that has a pitch-up stall characteristic it can lead to a phenomenon known as the deep or super stall from which there is no recovery. AT-tail requires a stronger fin to hold the tailplane so it is structurally heavy however, the plate effect of the tailplane renders the fin more efficient so it can be smaller. 
V tails combine the functions the fin and horizontal stabiliser. 
'T' tail reduces vortices at tip of fin, increasing efficiency of the fin 
High mounted tail plane is kept clear of turbulence of the wing 
Airframe Design 

Doors 
Aircraft doors and hatches form a vital part of the fuselage construction. In pressurised aircraft they often take the form of a wedge-shaped 'plug' door, where the door opens internally. The advantage of the plug door is that it will then be largely held in the closed position by the pressurisation in the cabin, therefore requiring less robust and heavy locking mechanisms. 
Complex hinge geometry means that many aircraft, most notably Boeing, have plug doors that open inwards initially, and then swing back through the aperture to open outwards, making more space available internally on the aircraft, and facilitating quicker evacuation than a wholly inward-opening door. 
Non-plug type doors rely upon strong locking mechanisms to keep them in place. Airbus cabin doors are of the non-plug type. Non­plug doors are also used where there is no space to open them internally, such as cargo holds. Once closed, they are secured by either sliding pins on the sides, 'dog' lugs on the opposite side to the hinges, or indeed a combination of pins and dogs. Six dog lugs are visible on the lower surface of the cargo door in the image. 
Some aircraft have doors that slide upwards on rails. They may operate electrically or the weight of the door may be taken by a combination of springs and counterbalances. 


Airf rame Design 
General Aviation Aircraft Doors 
Smaller regional or business aircraft often incorporate the boarding steps or 'air stairs' into the door. Whilst there is a weight penalty to this method, the benefits of being independent of ground support equipment make this type of door very popular. The type shown in this image is a typical design. 
Non-pressurised aircraft generally have doors of much lighter construction, and are usually secured by mechanical latches. They are most often hinged on the forward edge, so that an insecure door in flight is a much lesser hazard than it otherwise might be. 


Airframe Design 
fuselage construction. They need to withstand not only aerodynamic forces, but can also survive the impact of a 4 lb (1.8 kg) birdstrike at cruise speed. To achieve the strength and resilience required the front windows are of laminar construction. In pressurised transport aircraft the flight deck windows are automatically heated, typically to around 35°C. This is done not only for anti-icing and anti-misting purposes, but to ensure that the windows remain malleable rather than brittle. 
Heating elements are built up in the laminations of the flight deck window. Typically, the sandwich would consist of a tough glass outer layer, a film oftransparent heating element, then further laminations of glass or polycarbonate with vinyl layers between them. The front windows are usually well over an inch (25 mm) thick. 
There is a requirement laid down in the Certification Specifications (CS 25.773) for a 'direct vision' window. Specifically, it states that there must be 'a clear portion ofthe windshield during precipitation conditions, sufficient for both pilots to have a sufficiently extensive view along the flight path in normal flight attitudes'. It goes on to specify that 'the first pilot must have a window that is openable ... when the cabin is not pressurised, provides the view specified (above), and gives sufficient protection from the elements against impairment ofthe pilot's vision'. 

Heating film Centre glass 
Airf rame Design 
Windows continued 
These specifications would assist in taxiing if the windshield were to be obscured, for example from a birdstrike, or indeed from hailstorm damage. The pilots of the Delta Airlines Airbus A320 shown here would certainly have been grateful for an opening side window after landing at Denver with this severe hail damage in August 2015. 
Cabin windows are normally made from acrylic or polycarbonate material, and in two or more layers for pressurised aircraft. 
Airframe Design 

Eye Reference Position 
Vertical Field of View 
Old aircraft were poorly designed with instruments and switches located in seemingly random places. The pilot frequently had to move their head and body in order to see some instruments. Clearly this presented a flight hazard. Fortunately, modern flight decks are much improved ergonomically. Ifthe pilot adjusts the seat to get their eyes in a fixed position known as the eye 


reference position, then everything is in view. The most critical instruments being in easy view, less critical in a slightly wider view. Horizontal Field of View 
The eye reference position assumes a normal line-of-sight of 15° Left 
Optimum Maxi down, and then establishes a primary field of view that must be Left 
achievable by eye rotation only. This image shows the vertical ~ c,..,u,. 
Centreline and lateral extent of the primary field of view. Right 
Right 




Lesson 3 
Principles of Hydraulics 

AGK 03 
Principles of Hyd raul ics 
ftiikf-lo 
Introduction 
Hydraulic systems use fluid in a pipe to transmit and multiply force or to transmit power. In aircraft, hydraulic systems are used as servos so the pilot can operate controls and systems remotely and at loads far beyond their bare physical capacity. These will include operation of the flying controls, raising and lowering the undercarriage and operation of the wheel brakes. 
Except in the braking systems of light aircraft the hydraulic system will be a powered system. A pump will provide the operating power and the pilot's function will be to control the system. A powered system is correctly called an active system, and those simple hydraulic systems without a pump are called passive systems. 
In a modern transport aircraft hydraulic power is essential for safe efficient operation, so aircraft are fitted with multiple systems to provide system redundancy. 


Hydraulic systems are used to transmit and increase forces 
Principles of Hydraulics 
Static or hydrostatic pressure is a form of potential energy. Water in a reservoir on a hill has potential energy because of its height. 
The shape of the container does not matter a column of fluid will exert a static pressure at its base. This pressure will be the same regardless of the shape of the container, providing the height of the top of the fluid remains the same. If the outlet at the bottom is opened, this energy can be released in a fluid flow, which has dynamic energy. The hydraulic power generated depends on the pressure and the volume of the flow. 
Hydraulic pressures in aircraft systems range from low pressure at 1000 pounds per square inch (psi), to very high pressure at 5000 psi. Standard high-pressure systems operate at 3000 psi, and standard low pressure systems operate at 2000 psi. More recent aircraft such as the Airbus A380 and Boeing 787 are much larger and heavier than their predecessors, so logically need more hydraulic services. Both the A380 and the B787 operate at around 5000 psi. 
High pressure high systems can transmit more power without the need for larger components thereby saving weight. Disadvantages are that leaks are more prone to spraying, and the rate of leak is faster. Both represent a greater fire risk. Additionally, a high pressure leak presents a greater hazard to personnel. 
ft.iiflo 

The shape of the container does not matter 
Principles of Hydraulics 


ft+itfto 
Pascal's Law 

Pascal's law states that, in an enclosed container, any change in pressure is experienced throughout the fluid and pressure acts at l right angles to the container walls. 

Principles of Hydraulics 

Force, Area and Pressure 
Force acts either as an input or an output. Pressure is the energy 
raised in the fluid, and by acting on an area produces a force. This is normally expressed as: F=AxP but by transposing the formula: A=F+P we can find each part P=F + A 
While S.I. units are used on occasions, the use of the Imperial system is more common. So: 
Force is expressed in pounds (lb) 
Area in square inches (sq in or in2) 


Pressure is pounds per square inch (psi) 
This means an input force of 100 lb applied to an area of 10 sq in will raise a pressure of 10 psi. 
Obviously ifwe use two pistons of equal size interconnected by a pipe, an input force at one end will produce an equal output force. To gain the mechanical advantage that levers and pulley blocks 
Force is increased by using a small input piston and a large output 
would give in hydraulics we use a small input piston and a larger 


piston
output piston. 


Principles of Hydraulics 
Force, Area and Pressure continued 
In the example an input force of 20 lb acting on a piston of 2 sq in area will raise a pressure of 10 psi. This will be felt equally throughout the fluid in the enclosing container and acts at right angles to the container walls, so as the fluid acts upon the larger piston of 20 sq in area this will give an output force of 200 lb. Ten times the area means ten times the force. 
There will, however, be no piston movement unless there is a flow of fluid. In this case the small piston being pushed in will displace a volume equal to its area multiplied by the distance it moved -its stroke. The fluid is transferred into the larger cylinder where it will spread out, so the larger piston will not move the same distance. 
Although imperial units have been used in the examples above, use what ever units of pressure, distance, area and force are provided in the questions. 
You could be asked to perform calculations using, area, stroke, force or pressure. Which formula you use will depend on what information you are given and what you are asked to find. 
ft+iifto 


Ouput
Input 
Force
Force 


2001b 
t
201b 
A perfect fluid cannot be compressed Ten times the area means ten times the force 
Principles of Hydraulics 
Force, Area and Pressure continued 
Example One. Given: Input Force of 20 lb Input Area of 2 in2 Output Area of 20 in2 Find: Output Force. 
In this example we can find the pressure by dividing the Force by the Area i.e. Pressure = Force 
Area We know that pressure is constant throughout the system so the same pressure is experienced at the output piston. We can therefore say Pressure = Input force = Output force Input area Output area 
Insert the values  20 lbf 2 sq.in  =  Output force 20 sq.in  
Transpose  
Output force  =  20 lbf x 20 sq2 sq.in  .in  =  200 lbf  

ft.Hflo 

Example Two 
Given:  Input force of 30 lbf  
Input distance of 2 inches  
Output distance of 0.1 inch  
Find:  Output force.  

Force times distance is work done. The work done at the input is the same as the work done at the output i.e. work done is a constant. 
We can therefore say Work done = Input force x Input distance = 
Output force x Output distance Insert the values 30 ibf x 2 inches= Output force x 0.1 inches Transpose Output force = 30 lbf x 2 inches = 600 lbf 
(0.1 inches) 
Principles of Hydraulics 
Force, Area and Pressure continued 
Example three 
Given:  Input area 0.5 sq. in  
Input distance 3 inches  
Output area 5 sq.in  
Find:  Output distance.  

In this example we consider the volume of fluid displaced because it is a constant. volume displaced= area x distance. Therefore we can say volume = Input area x Input distance = Output area x Output distance Insert values 0.5 sq.in x 3 in = 5 sq.in x Output distance Transpose Output distance = (0.5 sq.in x 3 in) = 0.3 in (5 sq.in) 


ft+H+to 

This concept only works if the hydraulic fluid is a perfect fluid, and incompressible. In reality, there is no such thing as a perfect fluid and we have to accept a little compressibility. For our purposes a fluid is considered incompressible so long as it will only compress by 10% of its volume when a force of 32 tons per square inch is applied. This is about 70 000 psi, well above the maximum operating pressure of aircraft systems. 

Principles of Hydraulics 
Hydraulic Fluids 
At this point we should look at the requirements for the fluids in use. Hydraulic fluids are subject to extremes of temperature and pressure and must meet stringent specifications. Ideally a hydraulic fluid should have these properties: 
Thermal Stability 
Hydraulic fluid must be able to cope with a wide temperature range say from -50°C to close to 100°C. In other words it must have a low freezing point and high boiling point. 
Resistance to Corrosion 
Hydraulic oil is in constant contact with metal parts manufactured to very high tolerances any pitting caused by corrosion would render the components unserviceable. 
High Flashpoint and Low Flammability 
The concern here is fire hazard in the case of a hydraulic leak. For example, a leak in the engine cowling or onto hot brakes could lead to a fire. 

ftjf=f 

Low Volatility 
Hydraulic oil is subject to rapidly varying pressures, it is vital that it remains in liquid form and does not show tendencies to vaporise. 
Low Viscosity 
Hydraulic fluid needs to flow easily and rapidly through narrow pipes and orifices therefore it must be of low viscosity throughout its temperature range. 
Incompressible 
It is vital that hydraulic fluid is incompressible, as any sponginess would lead to inaccurate responses particularly so of the flight controls. At the pressures used in aircraft the oil is considered incompressible. 
The two types offluid in common use are: 
¦ Mineral based 
• Synthetic based 
Principles of Hydraulics 
Mineral Based Fluid -DTD 585 
Mineral based fluid is made from kerosene and is coloured red for identification. This fluid must be used with synthetic rubber seals and hoses only. It is suitable for use in high-pressure systems. Because it has a kerosene base it is flammable, but has high boiling and flash point temperatures, it is chemically stable to a high temperature and has good resistance to foaming 
DTD 585 is red and can only be used with synthetic seals 


Synthetic Base -Skydrol 
Modern transport aircraft use synthetic based fluid. The base is phosphate ester and the fluid is generically known as Skydrol. It comes in three grades the common grade is 500A. Skydrol 500A is a high quality fluid which is coloured purple. These fluids are fire resistant and do not support combustion. The lower viscosity of Skydrol means that there is a lower probability of cavitation. These fluids must be used with butyl rubber, ethylene propylene or Teflon seals and hoses. Skydrol meets all the requirements for aircraft hydraulic fluids used in modern aircraft. 
ft.Mflo 

The different types of hydraulic fluid must not be used together as mineral and phosphate based fluids will not mix. Seals may also be damaged if the wrong fluid is used. It should also be appreciated that the colours specified for the fluids are for when the fluid is new. In use the colour ofthe fluids darken and may eventually all appear the same colour. Very old hydraulic systems using leather seals work satisfactorily with all the fluids listed above. 
Skydrol 500A is a purple high quality fluid used in modern aircraft 


Health and Handling of Hydraulic Fluids 
Hydraulic fluids used as recommended do not present any particular health hazards but are an irritant if they come in contact with the skin and eyes. First aid treatment is to wash off with large volumes ofwater. 
Principles of Hydraulics 
Advantages of hydraulic systems 
Force multiplication -the pilot's physical inputs are a small force on the toe brakes but the force applied to the brakes can be large. 
Power -the pilot's power input is small, say for the controls but the power output to the controls is large. The operation of undercarriage, large and heavy, only requires the operation of a switch/lever. 
Accuracy -the pilot's input can be replicated accurately. 
Efficiency -hydraulics are very efficient they lose very little energy. 
Easier to install than a mechanical system of rods, levers and pulleys. 
Power can be attained through multiple sources, say a pump on each engine. 


Disadvantages 
Can leak, in which case you have no system, so redundancy is essential. 
Leaking oil can damage some materials. For example, synthetic oils are good with butyl and ethylene but damage vinyl, rubber and some paint finishes. 
Principles of Hydraulics 

Passive Hydraulic Systems 

Vented plugs
A passive hydraulic system has no hydraulic pump, the pressure 
Brake fluid reservoir
is ultimately produced by the pilot. A light aircraft braking system is a typical passive system. As the 
Pilot's
pilot presses the brake pedal a small piston is forced into a 
pedals 
cylinder, called the master cylinder. The pressure is transmitted 
f 
Flexible hose
through pipes to the brake caliper located at the wheel. 
Inside the caliper is a larger cylinder, called the brake cylinder or slave cylinder, which multiplies the original force. The resulting pressure acts on a brake pad which is forced against either a 
Brake disk
drum or a disc attached to the wheel. 

l Parking brake leverRigid pipe 
As the pilot removes the input, system pressure is released. By 
Pressure 
fitting a valve that will trap hydraulic pressure in the system a 

plate parking brake facility can be provided. Brake caliper Brake plate 
Principles of Hydraulics 

Components of an Active (Powered) Hydraulic System 
The simplest of active hydraulic systems will, by definition, need a pump as a source of power. It will need something to control where the power goes, a selector valve, non return valves to ensure flow in the correct direction and something to convert the 
fluid energy into rotary or linear motion, an actuator or jack. 
More complex systems will need a reservoir offluid, and an accumulator to act as a store of energy for emergencies and to smooth out the power delivery. These components must be fitted in the correct order for the hydraulic system to operate correctly. This animation shows the layout of a simple system. 


The simplest system has a pump, a selector and an actuator 
Principles of Hydraulics 

Uses of an Active Hydraulic System 
A modern aircraft hydraulic system is designed to produce high pressure and large flow rates. Hydraulic power can be used for operation of: 
¦ 
Flight controls 

¦ 
Leading and trailing edge flaps 

¦ 
Brakes 

¦ 
Steering 

¦ 
Cargo doors and ramps 

¦ 
Undercarriage extension and retraction 


The system will have seals to prevent leaks, and a whole collection ofvalves to control fluid flow and pressure. The fluid used will be able to work at high temperature and pressure and have protection by a filter system. 
These components will now be introduced as we work through typical hydraulic systems. 


Principles of Hydraulics 
Pumps 
The main hydraulic pumps are usually driven from the accessory gearbox of the engine and therefore known as Engine Driven Pumps (EDPs). To protect the engine or prime mover that drives the pump, a weak link is provided that is designed to shear in the event of mechanical failure. If the pump should fail mechanically, there should be no damage to the engine -though you will of course lose that pump. The weak link is variously known as a 'shear neck' or a 'quill drive'. 
The pumps supply the flow to hydraulic fluid, and resistance to that flow produces pressure in the system. Spur gear and rotor type pumps are generally used in lower pressure systems of light aircraft, piston pumps are used in larger aircraft. As there are two types of piston pumps they need to be considered in context and we will look at them later. This animation shows a spur gear pump. 
Electrically driven pumps are used as backup pumps on big aircraft and, sometimes, as the main pumps on smaller aircraft. Air Driven Pumps (ADPs) feature as backup pumps on many large aircraft including the B747. Hand operated pumps are often fitted for use in ground operation, for maintenance and for emergency use when airborne. 



Pumps are usually engine driven 
Spur gear pumps force fluid between the gear teeth and the housing 

Principles of Hydraulics 

Actuators 

Linear Actuators Piston area 
Actuators turn the hydraulic pressure into movement. There are three types of linear actuator: 
] --~
in 
¦ 
Single acting 

¦ 
Double acting balanced 

¦ 
Double acting unbalanced 


Single Acting Actuators 
Single acting actuators use hydraulic pressure to move them in 
force= 4000 pounds
one direction only. Another force, such as a spring, is used to move them in the opposite direction. 
Single acting actuators act in one direction against spring force 
Principles of Hydraulics 
Double Acting Balanced Actuators 
A double acting actuator uses hydraulic pressure to move it in both directions. A double acting balanced or compensated actuator has ram rods of equal area on both sides of the piston, so for a given pressure the actuator will give equal force for extension and retraction. These actuators are commonly used for flight controls where the same response is desirable in both directions. 

force=
force= 

3000 pounds
3000 pounds 
Piston area =4 sq. inRod area 
=1 • f1000 PSI 

Balanced actuators give the same force in both directions 

Principles of Hydraulics 

Double Acting Unbalanced Actuators 
A double acting unbalanced or uncompensated actuator works 
force=
hydraulically in both directions. The difference is that as the piston 

force= 
4000 poundshas the ram attached to one side only the pressure has a reduced 3000 pounds Piston area
area on which to act and will exert a smaller force in that direction. 
Piston area =4 sq. in 
= 3 sq. inThis means an actuator can be simply designed to produce different forces, for example on retraction and extension of landing gear, for the same supply pressure. Unbalanced actuators are used for things other than flight controls. 
f1000 PSI 
Double acting unbalanced actuators give different forces on retraction and extension 
1000 PSIT 
Principles of Hydraulics 
Rotary Actuators (Hydraulic Motors) 
If rotary rather than linear motion is required for a system it can be achieved by directing hydraulic pressure to a hydraulic motor. The speed of the motor is dependant on the rate of flow of the fluid. A selector valve can be used to change the direction of the flow and so change the direction of the motor. 
In addition to driving flap and undercarriage systems hydraulic motors are sometimes also used to drive back up electrical generators. 
Principles of Hydraulics 
Hydraulic Seals 
Hydraulic components have to be sealed to prevent both internal and external leakage. Seals that are fitted between moving surfaces are termed dynamic, those between two fixed parts are termed static, and as shown below, seals get their names from their cross section. 
Friction in dynamic seals can result in the seal 'rolling out'. To prevent this happening backing rings are fitted for support. 
Leaks 
An external leak will result in a loss of system pressure, loss of fluid, a rise in the temperature of the remaining fluid and cause a possible fire risk. An internal leak, from high pressure to low, causes a drop in system pressure, more activity of pressure regulating or cut-out valves and a rise in system temperature. 

Round or 
V-section
Toroidal ring 

Square-section 
Backing rings prevent the seal rolling out Internal leaks cause a rise in fluid temperature 
Principles of Hydraulics 

Selector Valves 
Selector valves direct the hydraulic fluid to and from the actuators to control the direction of their movement. The valves can be either be of the rotary or spool type. They can be operated 
ReNrYOII" 
mechanically or electrically. 
Rotary Selectors 
A four port rotary selector has two fluid paths and is used with a double acting actuator. A four port selector allows one path for fluid flow into the actuator and the other path simultaneously makes the return flow to the reservoir. 
A two port rotary selector has one fluid path and is used with a single acting actuator. 


A four port selector is used with a double acting actuator 
Principles of Hydraulics 
Spool Valves 

Spool valves are also known as pilot valves. The valve is cylindrical in shape and forms a sliding but leak-tight fit in its housing. The spool valve consists of 'lands' and 'grooves'. The Spool 
valve --~ 
lands block oil flow through the valve body. The grooves allow oil or gas to flow around the spool and through the valve body. Movement of the valve allows fluid to flow or blocks it off by the lands of the valve. 
Principles of Hydraulics 
Hydraulic Lock 
If the selector is placed so no fluid can flow, neither in nor out of the actuator, then the actuator piston will be locked in position, unable to move. This is called a hydraulic lock. Hydraulic locks are used deliberately to lock actuators in position. 
Principles of Hydraulics 

Open Centred Systems 
An open centred system is a low pressure system fitted on older light aircraft. It is used to operate flaps and undercarriage. Only one actuator can be operated at a time. 
RuefVOir 
The system uses a spur gear type of engine driven pump (EDP). The fluid is pumped continuously around the system through the centre ofthe open centred selectors. The pressure will be low until a selection is made. This reduces the load on the pump, which reduces the engine power required, while the system is not operating. 
Selecting the service will divert all the pump's output into the selected actuator. When the pressure reaches a set level the selector automatically returns to the open position, hydraulically locking the actuator. To protect the system should the selector fail to return to the open position a Pressure Relief Valve ("PRV" -see 


the next lesson) is fitted. 
Only one actuator can be operated at a time When off load the fluid passes through the centre of the selectors 




Lesson 4 
Hydraulic Valves and Actuators 

AGK04 
Hydraulic Valves and Actuators 
Valves 
Pressure and Thermal Relief Valve 
Pressure relief valves (PRV) are used to protect hydraulic systems from over pressurisation in the event of failure of the normal pressure control of the pumps. A common design, consisting of of a ball valve held onto a valve seat by spring pressure, is shown here. The area of the ball exposed to the fluid is very small, thus the spring's force is relatively low. 
At normal working pressure the valve remains firmly seated. A rise in pressure will unseat the ball, allowing the fluid to return to the reservoir. The pressure at which the ball first lifts is called the cracking pressure. Any further increase in pressure will lift the ball higher, allowing more fluid to return. If the valve can relieve the total output of the pump it is called a full flow relief valve (FFRV). 
ft+IF·Ho 


Pump limits pressure (3000 PSI) 
Relief pressure reached (3300 PSI) 
Pressure 
The valve opens at the cracking pressure 
Hydraulic Valves and Actuators 
ft.ifid o 

Pressure and Thermal Relief Valve 
As the pressure drops the valve will start to close. The pressure at which the valve seats is called the re-seating pressure, this is always below the cracking pressure. 
The pressure relief valve can also act as a thermal relief valve (TRV), tapping off system pressure caused by thermal expansion. This condition may occur when the aircraft is parked in a warm place. A hydraulic lock is formed and there is very little fluid flow. When it is used as a TRV it typically operates at higher pressures than it would when used as a PRV. 
Pressure 
The valve closes at a lower pressure, the re-seating pressure 
Hydraulic Valves and Actuators 
ft+itido 


Non Return Valves (NRVs) 
Non return valves only allow fluid flow in one direction they are also known as check valves. 
The common design for an NRV is a ball valve held onto a seat by the force of a spring. Fluid pressure in one direction 'unseats' the ball, allowing flow, when the pressure falls and flow stops the ball will reseat under spring pressure. Pressure in the opposite direction will seal the ball more firmly onto its seating. To guard against incorrect installation of an NRV, an arrow is stamped or moulded into it showing the direction of flow. 
Non-return valve 
Non return valves only allow fluid flow in one direction 
Hydraulic Valves and Actuators 

Shuttle Valves  
A shuttle valve is used to allow one service to be operated by two  
independent supplies at different times for instance a normal and  
an emergency supply. If the primary supply fails, the secondary  
supply will push the shuttle across automatically, both connecting  
the service to the most appropriate pressure and isolating the  
primary port.  
Shuttle valves are fitted in the supply lines of critical services like  
primary flying controls or wheel brakes. A sticking shuttle valve  
can prevent a service operating from the emergency supply.  
Shuttle valves allow an actuator to be supplied by a secondary  
system  

Hydraulic Valves and Actuators 
ft.ifid o 
Restrictor Valves or Chokes 
Restrictors valves or chokes are used to reduce the flow offluid in order to reduce the speed of operation of a services that would otherwise move too quickly. 
A one way restrictor opens to allow full flow in one direction but closes to reduce the flow in the return direction. To show the direction of full flow a bold arrow is stamped on the case, with an 
Full 
arrow made of dots showing the restricted flow. 

Flow 

One way restrictors slow services that would otherwise move too quickly 
Hydraulic Valves and Actuators 

n +e+•o 
Two Way Restrictor Valves 
A two way restrictor slows the flow of fluid in both directions. This would be used, for example, to reduce the flow to a nose gear that requires less force to operate than the main gear. 

Hydraulic Valves and Actuators 
ft.HU o 
Throttling Valves 
Throttling valves are a more sophisticated form of restrictors. 
They ensure that the fluid flow rate to and from a component, and therefore the speed of operation, is correct. As the supply flow rate increases the valve closes down throttling, or reducing, the output. 


Hydraulic Valves and Actuators 
ft++·+•­
Flow Control Valves 
Flow control valves are used upstream of hydraulic motors to ensure an even flow rate to maintain constant speed. They react to fluid flow, increased flow closes the valve down. A damper slows the closing action and prevents damage. 

Out In 
Hydraulic Valves and Actuators 

n +e+•o 
Pressure Reducing Valves 
Pressure reducing valves reduce the operating pressure supplied to sub-systems such as brakes. 

Main system supply enters the inlet port, flows down through the valve and into the sub-system. Drain
Spring 

As the pressure rises the valve is forced up against the spring, reducing the size ofthe inlet until the combination of flow and inlet Inlet size produces the required sub-system pressure. 
Outlet 
Spool 
Pressure reducing valves reduce the operating pressure supplied to sub-systems such as brakes 
Hydraulic Valves and Actuators 
Sequence Valves 
Sequence valves are used to ensure that one operation is completed before another one starts, for example ensuring that the landing gear doors open before the landing gear extends. 
Hydraulic sequence valves work by directing system fluid into one service, ensuring its complete operation before the fluid can enter the second service. 
In the animation the door actuator operates first then, when it reaches the end of its stroke, the pressure builds up and moves the sequence valve across allowing fluid into the gear down line. Mechanical sequence valves may also be used. On retraction this will prevent the door from closing before the gear is up. The reverse is true for gear extension. The animation shows this very clearly, and in both directions. 
Hydraulic Valves and Actuators 
ft.iiiiWo 
Hydraulic Fuses 
Hydraulic fuses are fitted upstream of components to shut off flow and prevent total loss of system fluid if there is a leak. 
The fuse is designed to sense flow rate if it increases above the normal rate the piston will move across to stop the flow completely. The service will be inoperative but the rest of the system will function as normal. 


Hydraulic fuses are fitted upstream of components to shut off flow if there is a leak 
Hydraulic Valves and Actuators 
Modulators 
This component is only used in the older hydro-mechanical anti­skid systems (Maxarets). It is fitted between the brake control valve and the single acting pistons of the brake unit and provides fine control of brake pressure in the maxarets. 
With the brakes off, the spring holds the piston across to the left. When the brakes are applied the piston moves to the right pushing the fluid into the cylinders, applying the brakes. The swept volume of the modulator is equal to the brake cylinders' swept volume. 
If the Maxaret detects a skid it operates an anti-skid valve which releases a small amount of fluid upstream of the modulator. This results in a pressure drop in the brake supply line. To equalise the pressure both sides of the modulator piston a small amount of fluid passes through the orifice, which in turn reduces the force applied to the brake. As the pressure is re-applied only a small amount of fluid passes back through the orifice. This prevents the sub system using a large amount of fluid yet it is still able to control the force applied to the brakes. On releasing the brakes completely, the spring returns the piston to the original position. 
Bra • To 
prusure bra 
0 Cl 
Modulators provide fine control of brake pressure in maxarets 
Hydraulic Valves and Actuators 
Priority Valve or Pressure Maintaining Valve 
The priority of a hydraulic system is to supply pressure (flow) to the primary flying controls and wheel brakes. The Priority Valve (PMV) achieves this by closing and isolating non-essential services. If the pressure drops below a set limit, any remaining pressure will then go to these primary services. 
....------Primary StlVlc.s 
The priority valve isolates non-essential services if pressure falls 
Hydraulic Valves and Actuators 
Fluid Temperature 
During operation ofthe hydraulic system the fluid temperature increases. To keep the fluid at its correct operating temperature, hot fluid returning to the reservoir is passed through a heat exchanger. This can be a ram air unit however it is more normal to mount the heat exchanger in the fuel tank under the unusable fuel. This cools the fluid and at the same time heats the fuel preventing waxing and freezing. 
The system's fluid temperature is displayed on the flight deck overheat indicators are installed at the pumps. Over heated fluid will discolour by darkening and becoming more viscous. 
Filtration and Hydraulic Circuit Protection 
Hydraulic systems need to be kept free of any contamination. The hydraulic fluid is filtered to remove any debris greater than 25 microns that could cause damage to the system. As the pump is a likely source of contamination it is standard procedure to fit a filter downstream of the pump, which is referred to as a full flow micronic pressure filter (FFMPF). Some systems fit a filter unit into the return line before the reservoir as well as or instead ofthe FFMPF. 

-Bypass relief valve In Out 
--Filter element Filter bowl 

A micronic filter is fitted downstream of the pump The filter light indicates the filter is becoming blocked 

Hydraulic Valves and Actuators 
Filtration and Hydraulic Circuit Protection continued 
The filter consists of a bowl, head and element. Fluid enters the 
In
head and flows into the bowl around the outside of the element. As it passes through the element any particles of more than 25 microns are deposited on the filter, the fluid then flows up and out through the head. As the debris builds up on the element (known as clogging) a differential pressure will occur across the element. This actuates a filter light on the flight deck, warning that the element is in the process of becoming blocked. 

-Bypass relief valve 
Filter element 
Hydraulic Valves and Actuators 

Filtration and Hydraulic Circuit Protection continued 

-Bypass relief valve 

At a set level the differential will operate the bypass valve opening a direct route, allowing unfiltered fluid to flow through the system In Out at the same rate as before. On some filters a red button will show when the bypass has activated, this is referred to as 'filter popping'. It should be noted that not all filters are of the full flow type operation ofthe indicator button warns of impending operation of the by-pass on some filters. 
--Filter element 
The security of the hydraulic system also includes shut off valves which will prevent hydraulic fluid being delivered to and out of the 
Filter bowl
pumps. These shut off valves are operated in the event of pump failure or engine fire. Also in the system are the pressure relief valves which have already been discussed. In summary the security of the hydraulic system comprises: 
¦ 
Filters 

¦ 
Pressure relief valves 


A red button can also be used to show that the filter is blocked 
¦ 
By-pass valves 

¦ 
Fire shut-off valves 





Lesson 5 Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 

AGKOS 

Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 
ft+IHhlo 
Fixed Volume or Constant Displacement Pumps 
Fixed volume pumps are high-pressure engine driven pumps (EDP) and move a constant volume of fluid into the system for each revolution output is therefore a function of rpm. To regulate the system pressure and reduce wear on the pump an automatic cut out valve (ACOV), a non-return valve, and its associated accumulator must be used. 
Fixed volume pumps are sometimes referred to as constant displacement or axial piston pumps and are driven by the engine via the ancillary gearbox and the Constant Speed Unit at a fixed speed. The reciprocating action of the pistons is achieved by angling the body of the pump. There are normally 7 or 9 pistons in the pump, each piston moves in its own cylinder in the rotating cylinder block. The output from the pump does not vary. 


The output from the pump does not vary 
Constant displacement pumps must be used with an ACOV, a non­return valve, and an accumulator 

Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 
ft.ii+lo 
Fixed Volume or Constant Displacement Pumps continued 
Fluid is normally supplied to the pump under a slight pressure to avoid cavitation. It passes in and out through two kidney shaped ports in the valve plate. The pistons move down their cylinders as they pass the inlet valve, drawing in fluid, and move back up their cylinders to expel the fluid as they pass the outlet valve. This process ensures a constant output volume. 
To cool and lubricate the moving parts in the pump a leakage of system fluid is allowed. This fluid exits through the case drain and returns to the reservoir via a case drain filter or the low-pressure filter. An overheat sensor is fitted at the pump and the pump outlet pressure is monitored and displayed to the pilot. 


Cooling and lubrication is by fluid leakage 

Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 
ft+it+lo 
Automatic Cut-Out Valve 
The automatic cut-out valve (ACOV) is used to regulate the pressure in the system between a high setting and a low setting when a constant volume pump is used to power the hydraulic system. When system pressure builds up it is felt on the piston and the poppet valve. As the piston is larger than the poppet valve the force produced in the piston will overcome the combined forces of the spring and the poppet valve when the upper pressure is achieved. The opening of the poppet valve allows the fluid to flow to the reservoir. The resulting drop in pressure causes the NRV to close, locking the pressure in the system and the poppet valve to open fully. This now provides an idling circuit for the pumps total output and the ACOV is said to be 'kicked out'. 
Operation of any service will cause a drop in the system pressure, when it falls to the value of the lower setting the spring snaps the poppet valve closed and the pump output is directed back into the system. This is referred to as the 'kick in' pressure. 
If this form of pressure regulation fails then a FFRV will control the system at a higher setting. To prevent the ACOV cutting in and out rapidly, which can be referred to as ACOV or hydraulic hammering, an accumulator and a non-return valve are always used in conjunction with the ACOV. 
Idling flow--• 


The poppet valve opens to create an idling circuit and the ACOV is 'kicked out' The 'kick in' pressure is lower than the 'kick out' pressure A leak can cause hydraulic hammering 


Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 

Accumulators 
Accumulators are fitted to: 
Charging valve 
¦ 
Store fluid under pressure (energy) 

¦ 
Provide a limited supply of pressure in an emergency 



Diaphragm 
I 
¦ Dampen out pressure fluctuations 
SeparatorGas Gas 
¦ 
Allow for thermal expansion 

¦ 
Cater for small internal leaks Accumulators come in four styles, with three shown in the image: 

a. 
A cylindrical container without separator -an old system 

b. 
A cylindrical container with a separator or free floating piston 

c. 
A spherical container with a flexible diaphragm 





(a) (b) (c)
d. A spherical container with a bladder inside it -an even older system and not illustrated. 
Whatever the design, one side of the container is connected to the hydraulic system and the other is charged with nitrogen gas. 

Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 
ft.ii+lo 
Accumulators continued 
With the hydraulic system de-pressurised, or slack, a pre-charge of nitrogen is put into the gas chamber ofthe accumulator. This gas pressure must be equal to the minimum working pressure of the system: usually approximately half the maximum working pressure. As hydraulic fluid is pumped into the system raising pressure, the accumulator will charge with fluid, compressing the gas until the fluid pressure and gas pressure are equal. Any demand on the system will result in a drop in the system pressure, so the gas expels the fluid into the system and maintains the system at a slightly lower operating pressure -this ensures smooth operation of components and services. 
Accumulators are fitted into hydraulic sub systems, like the brake system. The accumulator acts as a limited pressure reservoir in emergency and dampens pressure fluctuations. 
If the EDP fails then the NRV upstream of the accumulator will close and the accumulator will provide a limited number of brake operations before exhausting. 
The gas in the accumulator, which is compressible where the hydraulic fluid is not, will dampen out pressure fluctuations in the system. 

The accumulator will cope with small internal leakages by maintaining the system pressure and will absorb any increase in fluid pressure created by an increase of fluid temperature downstream of a NRV. 
An accumulator must be used in conjunction with an ACOV. If the gas charge of an accumulator is incorrect, either too high or too low, this will cause the ACOV to operate more frequently. This can lead to hydraulic hammering, which must be investigated as soon as possible. Another effect is a rise in the fluid temperature. 
Most modern aircraft have a pressure gauge fitted in the gas charging line this gauge will show the pre-charge pressure when the system is slack and the fluid pressure when the system is operating. 
The accumulator acts as a limited pressure reservoir and dampens pressure fluctuations 
Too high or too low charge pressure will cause hydraulic hammering 

Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 

Variable Volume or Constant Pressure Pumps 
In systems using a variable volume pump the ACOV and its associated accumulator are not required, although system accumulators may be installed for other reasons. 
A variable volume pump operates in a similar way to a fixed stroke pump except its output is not dependant on pump speed as the volume of the pistons can be altered. This means the pump self regulates and only supplies the fluid needed to maintain the constant working pressure within the system. 
Variable volume pumps are driven by the engine via the ancillary gearbox. Unlike fixed volume pumps, the drive and cylinder block are directly in line. 
Cylinder Fluid from reservoir block Sliding shoe
Piston Drive shaft 
Valve plate Outlet 

Pressure Case drain 
Control 
output 
piston 
An ACOV is not required 
The output volume varies to maintain the pressure 

Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 



Variable Volume or Constant Pressure Pumps continued Cylinder 
A movable 'swash plate' controls the piston travel. Altering the swash plate's datum will alter the distance of the piston pumping action. At maximum deflection or maximum stroke the pistons will move the most fluid, at neutral the pistons will not pump any fluid as they do not move in or out. This provides an idle condition for the pump. 
The swash plate is connected to a control piston or hanger piston. This has two forces acting on it, spring pressure to move towards maximum deflection or 'on stroke' and system pressure to move towards neutral or 'off stroke'. 
On start up of the engine the pump will be at maximum stroke, this 
Pressure Case drain 
Control 

will cause the pump to try and pressurise the whole system on output 
piston 
starter motor power. To offload the starter motor a blocking valve, described below, is used. 

The pump is lubricated and cooled again by internal fluid leakage The pump delivers most fluid at maximum stroke to the case drain. A overheat sensor is fitted at the pump and the On start up the pump will be at maximum stroke pump outlet pressure is monitored and displayed to the pilot. 
Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 
ft++++fo 
Blocking Valves 
A blocking valve is used to keep starting loads on the engine to a minimum by setting a variable output EDP to zero output. The blocking valve is closed by a spring and opened by system pressure. 
To offload the pump on start, the pilot selects "depressurise" on the hydraulics panel. This energises the depressurising or blocking solenoid, moving the valve down so the pump's output acts on both sides of the blocking valve and it remains shut. At the same time the output acts on the compensator which boosts the pressure to the control piston, moving the swash plate to the neutral position and offloading the pump. 
After the engine has reached idling RPM, the pilot selects "pressurise" which de-energises the solenoid and allows the depressurising valve to return to its original position. The fluid under the blocking valve drains away so the blocking valve opens and the pump goes to maximum deflection. 
In an engine fire situation, actuation of the fire handle operates the de-pressurising solenoid and the fluid supply valves are operated to isolate the EDPs. Note that both valves use 28 volts DC. 


Fire switch EDP control switch 
The blocking valve off loads the pump during engine start 


Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 
ft+M+fo 
Back Up Hydraulic Power Hydraulic Power Transfer 
Power transfer
On a modern transport aircraft with more than one hydraulic 
shaft 
system, back up power to a system in the event of failure ofthe main pump can be obtained by use of hydraulic motor in one system to operate a hydraulic pump in another system. These linked units are referred to as power transfer units or PTUs. A flow of fluid enters the motor, which acts in reverse to a pump, pushing the pistons down and creating rotary motion. This in turn drives the pump. Fluid does not transfer from one system to the other, only power. PTUs are not designed to be used when the hydraulic 
Hydraulic
system has a fault, such as overheat, or leak. On some aircraft, 
motor 
A320 for example, the PTU is reversible, it is known as a bi­directional PTU or reversible motor pump. 
PTUs are common on large aircraft. They transfer power not fluid 
Hydraulic pump 

Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 
Back Up Hydraulic Power continued  
Air Turbine Motors  
Pneumatic (air) systems can be used to operate a back up hydraulic pump. Air is bled from the compressors of a gas turbine engine and directed onto a Air Turbine Motor (ATMs) which is then  Power transfer shaft  
in turn drives a hydraulic pump. These are used as a backup  
source of hydraulic power on older aircraft, notably the L 1011 Tri Star and the 8747.  
On the 8747, the air driven pump is called a demand pump.  
When switched to AUTO it activates to support the engine driven pump in times of high demand, say when operating the landing gear, flap and flight controls at the same time. If it failed to activate there is a risk of sluggish response from the flight controls.  Hydraulic motor  Hydraulic pump  

Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 
AC Pumps  
Back up hydraulic pumps can also be driven by electric motors.  
The output from these pumps is considerably less than would be  
obtained from the main Engine Driven Pumps. As with the ATM  
pumps, AC pumps may also be used as demand pumps.  
Ram Air Turbines  
If all the normal sources of hydraulic power fail, some aircraft will  
be fitted with a Ram Air Turbine (RAT). The RAT provides  
emergency hydraulic power for flight controls in the event of loss  
of engine driven hydraulic power.  
When the main system pressure falls below a pre-set value, the  
RAT is deployed into the air stream, using pressure from its own  
accumulator. The blades will windmill in the slipstream and drive a  
hydraulic pump, a speed sensor will control the pitch of the blades  
to prevent over speeding. Although the RAT will operate at full  
system pressure, the flow rate is much smaller that the EDP.  Hand Pumps  
Therefore, it's use is usually limited to the primary flying controls.  Some aircraft are fitted with hand operated pumps. These pumps  
are generally fitted to provide hydraulic operations on the ground  
during maintenance, they can also be used in emergency.  

Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 

Pressure Gauges 
Direct Reading Gauges 
In older aircraft the system pressure is displayed using direct reading gauges. These have a curved "Bourdon" tube inside them, which is filled with hydraulic fluid. Any increase in the system pressure will also increase the pressure in the tube, causing it to try and straighten this movement is translated into a reading. To prevent a leakage from the gauge at high-pressure a pressure relay is fitted. This isolates the system fluid from the gauge fluid. It is the outlet pressure from the pump that is sensed and displayed. 

Pressure Transmitters 
Modern aircraft make use of pressure transducers, which sense pressure and convert the signal into an electrical output. The electrical signal is then transmitted to remote gauges in the cockpit. The overall system is called a pressure transmitter. As well as deriving a signal of pump output pressure the transmitters can also be used to actuate overpressure or low pressure warnings of pump output and operate warning lamps or annunciators. 
Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 

Reservoirs 
Reservoirs provide: 
¦ 
A reserve of system fluid that can cater for small external leakage 

¦ 
An air space to cater for jack ram displacement 

¦ 
An air space that allows for fluid expansion 

¦ 
The normal supply offluid to the EDP 

¦ 
A limited emergency reserve of fluid 

¦ 
A positive head of pressurised fluid into the inlet of the EDP 

¦ 
A means to bleed air and dissolved gases from the fluid 

¦ 
A means of checking the system fluid quantity. 


Reservoirs are designed to provide storage for the system fluid. A sight glass allows for the visual reading of the fluid level and normally has an upper horizontal line marked max and a lower line marked min. These are accepted levels for normal operation. In modern aircraft a quantity gauge or low level warning is incorporated on the flight deck. The filler cap is fitted with a finger screen filter to strain incoming fluid. Remember only the correct hydraulic fluid can be used, mixing of fluid is not allowed. The level of the fluid alters during operation as jacks are displaced and the fluid expands with temperature. 

Connection for
Filler neck, cap 
vent line or 
and fastener 
pressurising line 
Finger strainer 
Glass sight 
gauge

Connection for return line ----+__,.......,.,__, 
_ Working fluid level baffleDe-aerator tray / 
Fin Fin 
Connection Connection for for emergency main system system pump pump 
Reservoirs hold a reserve of fluid and allow it to be de-aerated. 
Fluid levels can only be checked with the system at rest and the accumulators correctly charged. 

Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 

Reservoirs continued 
The main system supply is taken via a stack or standpipe. The purpose of this is to ensure an emergency supply of hydraulic fluid. If a leak occurs in the reservoir or in the return line the reservoir will only empty to the top of the standpipe, allowing a reserve of fluid within the reservoir for emergency use. 
The emergency (hand pump) supply is taken from the bottom of the reservoir. To keep fluid at the mouth of the stack pipe, fins and baffles are fitted to prevent swirling due to turbulence. 
The low pressure fluid returning to the reservoir flows over a de­aerator tray, which can be either a series of steps or a flat tray with small holes through it. The de-aerator tray allows any air bubbles and dissolved gas to leave the fluid ensuring that only liquid collects around the mouth of the stack pipe. 
Reservoirs can be vented to atmosphere or pressurised. If they are vented to atmosphere there is a danger that the fluid in the system could boil at high altitude leading to pump cavitation and even the possibility of gas trapped in the lines and actuators. For this reason pressurised reservoirs are now the norm. 
Filler neck, cap and fastener 
Finger strainer 

Connection for return line ----+__,.......,.,_., 
De-aerator tray / Fin 

Connection 
for emergency system pump 
Connection for vent line or pressurising line 
Glass sight 
gauge 
_ Working fluid level baffle 
Fin Connection for main system pump 
The standpipe preserves a reserve supply for emergency use The de-aerator removes bubbles from the fluid Air in the system leads to pump cavitation 

Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 

Pressurised Reservoirs 
Pressurised systems prevent fluid boiling at altitude and provide a positive pressure at the inlet to the EDPs to prevent cavitation. Engine bleed air is used to pressurise the reservoir. It also allows for design of systems where the reservoir is below the level of the pump or components. If the air pressure is lost then there will be a rise in the reservoir quantity. However, it is a design requirement that ifthis should happen then the EDP must be able to draw the fluid and supply more than 70% of its normal pressure. 
Other methods of achieving a positive pressure in the inlet of the high-pressure engine driven pump are the use of: 
¦ 
A boot strapped reservoir. 

¦ 
Electric booster pumps. 


To prevent leakage and to isolate the system from the reservoir an isolation or on/off supply valve is fitted. This is electrically activated and operation ofthe fire handle will close the valve. 

Connection for
Filler neck, cap 
vent line or
and fastener 
pressurising line 
Finger strainer 

Glass sight gaugeConnection for return line----+__,.......,.,__, 
_ Working fluid level baffleDe-aerator tray / 
Fin 
Fin 
Connection Connection for for emergency main system system pump pump 
Pressurised systems prevent fluid boiling at altitude and provide a 
positive pressure at the pump 


Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 
Light Aircraft Power Packs 

A modern system for light aircraft with retractable undercarriages is the self contained hydraulic power pack. This consists ofa reservoir, a reversible DC electric motor and flow and pressure control valves. The significant difference between power packs and standard hydraulic systems is that they are only used on demand to raise landing gear and maybe flaps. Once raised, the system is switched off until preparations are made for landing. The typical power pack system are: 
¦ 
The up or down movement is initiated by starting the pump motor in one direction or the other. 

¦ 
The fluid is only filtered on the up selection. 

¦ 
Fluid pressure opens the gear up check valve on "up" selection. 

¦ 
The spring moves the shuttle back on up selection, opening the down line to the reservoir. 

¦ 
When the gear is up a pressure switch removes the electrical power and the gear up check valve closes, forming a hydraulic lock to keep the gear fully retracted. 

¦ 
If the pressure drops in the up line, the pump automatically restarts to restore the pressure. 

¦ 
A higher pressure is required to raise the undercarriage than lower it, so the up line has a higher relief valve setting than the down line. 




Left main gear 

Right main gear 
hydraulic cylinder 
hydraulic cylinder 
Up t 
Down Y 0 
,-----· PressureNose gear 
' •--· switch hydraulic cylinder 
t 
Yo 
n-------ae=<] <:=:> 
II Free fall controlFree fall valve 
r========= High 
pressure Reservoir 
control 
Low pressure -+-+-+--~ control 

Shuttle valve~ 


Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 

Light Aircraft Power Packs continued 
¦ 
When the gear is up, a thermal relief valve protects the up line and actuators from over pressurisation caused by thermal expansion. 

¦ 
On down selection the piston allows the fluid to return to the pump and reservoir by moving across and opening the gear up check valve. 

¦ 
On down selection the pressure moves the shuttle, closing off the reservoir. 

¦ 
When the gear is down and locked mechanically, and requires no more pressure, the electrical supply to the pump is switched off. 

¦ 
Restrictors slow the operation of the nose gear. 

¦ 
The drop valve or free-fall valve opens the up line to the return so the gear can fall by gravity in case of power failure. 


The power pack system is protected against overpressure by the fact that the pump only runs on demand and is switched off by pressure or limit switches when the gear is up or down, by the PRVs and finally by the TRV. 
Left main gear 
Right main gear hydraulic cylinder 
hydraulic cylinder 

t Up 


Up t 
0 
,; Down 
Down ,; 0 
,-----· PressureNose gear 
' ' --• switchhydraulic cylinder 
t 
,; 0 

n---------a=J<:=:> Free fall 
control 
r;:========~ High 
pressure
Reservoir 
control 
Low 
Shuttle valve~ 

The pump is only on while an actuator is travelling 

Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 

Large Aircraft Systems 
Large aircraft place greater requirements on a hydraulic system, these are: 
¦ 
The need to operate multiple services at the same time 

¦ 
Instant response 

¦ 
Duplicated or triplicated primary systems 

¦ 
Emergency back-up systems 

¦ 
Priority to the flying controls and wheel brakes 

¦ 
Storage of a limited reserve of hydraulic energy for emergency use 

¦ 
Greater output force, to overcome heavier operating loads. 


These requirements are achieved using closed centred systems where the working pressure is available all the time and there is the instant response needed for the operation of the flying controls. 
The system shown has three independent hydraulic systems, called the blue, green and yellow systems. These names are not universal, other systems use names or letters like A, Band C to identify the systems. 


Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 

Large Aircraft Systems continued 
In this example, there are two engines: N°1 drives EDPs in the blue and green system and N°2 drives EDPs in the green and yellow system. The green system has two EDPs and two electric pumps, so it could be regarded as the 'master' system. 
There are two PTUs. If pressure is lost in the blue or yellow systems they can be pressurised from the green system through PTUs. 
There are three priority valves isolating the landing gear and the high lift devices. The landing gear will have an emergency lowering system independent of hydraulic power, and high lift devices are not absolutely essential for a safe emergency landing. 
The RAT powers the yellow system so that, at the very least, the flying controls will keep working. 


Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 

Large Aircraft Systems continued 
High system pressures allow smaller actuators to be used. As these will have a smaller volume to fill, the pressure supply pipes can be reduced in diameter. 
The small bore piping has four benefits: 
• 
The pipes are easier to route around the aircraft's structure. 

• 
There is less internal surface area for the pressure to act on. 

• 
Reduced fluid quantity is required. 

• 
System weight is reduced. 


In closed centred systems there must be strict regulation ofthe system pressure to prevent over-pressurisation and damage. This pressure regulation can be achieved by one of two methods. 
• 
Use of a fixed volume pump with an idling circuit, an automatic cut-out valve and its associated accumulator. 

• 
Use of a variable volume pump. 


If there is a high demand on the system, for example when operating flaps, undercarriage and flying controls at the same time, the large drop in pressure could result in a sluggish flight control response. 


Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators en • 
Pipes and Hoses 
All of the components described above are of little use unless they are connected by reliable pipework. These fall into two broad categories, pipes and hoses. As the name implies, pipes are solid, rigid components built to a very high specification in steel or stainless steel to withstand the tremendous pressures -typically 3000 psi on a large aircraft system. On all but the smallest of hydraulic systems the pressure line will be of a smaller diameter than the return line, as the hydraulic fluid will have expanded with heat while producing work for us in the actuators. 
Flexible hoses are essential to allow movement in the components that they supply, such as flight control actuators or landing gear. Not only do they have to withstand the same pressure as pipes, but they must be built to cope with many thousands of movements over their life cycle. They consist of layers of alternating rubber or polymers for flexibility and sealing, and steel braiding for strength. Radius of operation is also critical, as the effect of a flexible hose kinking and failing under pressure could be catastrophic. 
You can see examples of both solid pipes and flexible hoses in the braking lines in the photograph. 


Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 
Hydraulic Controls and Indicators 

Most modern aircraft only permit limited pilot control ofthe hydraulic system with functions such as PTU operation being automatically controlled. The diagram opposite, shows the controls which operate the hydraulic pumps on a B737 overhead panel and the low pump pressure and pump overheat warning lights. Although the B737 has three hydraulic systems, A, Band standby, only systems A and B are powered from engine driven pumps. The standby system is powered by an electric pump. 


Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 
Hydraulic Controls and Indicators continued 
The pilots also have an indication of hydraulic brake pressure, in this case on the First Officer's panel. 
Older aircraft require much more extensive crew operation of the hydraulics and will have indications of system contents and pressure, over temperature conditions and low pump output pressure. Selections of hydraulic power source are manual, rather than automatic. 

Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 

Hydraulic Controls and Indicators continued 
In the Airbus A320 the hydraulic systems are largely automatic. Failures are brought to the pilots' attention by the cautions & warning system, accompanied by an audible warning depending on severity. On the issuance of a caution, the basic supply system is presented on the lower ECAM. In the case shown, both the upper and lower ECAMs are displayed. The green system has lost fluid resulting in a LOW LEVEL and LOW PRESSURE warnings which are displayed on left hand side of the upper ECAM. The actions required by the pilots are shown in cyan. 
On the lower ECAM, functioning parts are shown in green and non-functioning parts in amber. Because there is no fluid it is not possible to transfer power from the yellow system via the PTU. 
The loss of the green system has secondary failures which are shown on the right hand side of the upper ECAM. In this case WHEEL & F/CTL are illuminated meaning landing gear will need free fall extension, nose wheel steering and normal braking is not available but most of the flight controls can be operated via the other systems. 
IT 
HYO 
YELLOW 
(l,~I [I. _ .,u, 
, -PTU <I ELEC 
RAT[> ELEC 
1 2
. 
[ ~ ~ 
TAT GW SAT 

Hydraulic Pumps and Accumulators 
Hydraulic Controls and Indicators continued 
The pilots action the drills on the hydraulic panel mounted on the overhead panel. 
If a hydraulic system employs electric pumps that are permanently running then they are monitored for overheating the warning & caution system would display it as HIGH TEMP requiring the pump be switched OFF possibly losing the services provided by that pump. 
The only traditional style gauge is the brake gauge which shows the remaining pressure in the accumulator and the pressure as applied to the brakes. 



Lesson 6 
Flying Controls 

AGK 06 
Flying Controls 
ftiihi-lo 
Introduction 
The primary flight controls of an aircraft manoeuvre the aircraft around the three axes comprising elevators, ailerons, roll spoilers, flaperons and rudder. Secondary flight controls are intended to improve the aircraft performance characteristics or to relieve excessive control loading they include lift augmentation devices such as flaps and slats, speed brakes, flight and ground spoilers, trimming devices such as trim tabs, and trimmable horizontal stabiliser. You should note that in the examinations it is assumed that a conventional jet transport aircraft has a swept wing and a trimable stabiliser (variable incidence trimming tailplane). 
Control surfaces can be actuated by three means of control, manual (reversible) in which the pilot gains no assistance, power­assisted (reversible) in which the pilot has some hydraulic help to move the control and, fully powered (irreversible), in which the pilot makes only a selection and the hydraulics provide all of the power. 


Flying Controls 
Manual Flight Controls 
Primary flight controls in light aircraft are operated directly by cables, pulleys and chains. The clear advantage of such a system is its simplicity, the disadvantages are that the control runs are rarely duplicated, and therefore a jammed control can cause a crash, and that aerodynamic forces which increase rapidly with forward speed can make the controls increasingly difficult to operate. This diagram shows a rare manual control run from a large aircraft, the aileron control on a BAe146. 
Most larger modern and high speed aircraft use hydraulically powered flight control systems. Powered flight controls can be either power assisted or fully powered. Both systems will have an input from the pilot to move a hydraulic control valve. This will direct pressure to an actuator which moves the flight control. The system is designed so that there is a follow up action to reposition the control valve. This ensures control surface movement is proportional to control input. 
ft+i.i-lo 


Flying Controls 
Power Assisted Flight Controls 
In a power assisted flight control system the pilot still has a physical input to the flight controls. 
As the name of the system suggests, hydraulic power will assist the pilot in moving the controls. The pilot will still get feed back of the air loads imposed on the control. This provides the pilot with 'feel'. In the event of hydraulic failure the pilot can still operate the control, although stick forces would be very high. 
Manual and power assisted flying controls are known as reversible flying controls. 
ft.lhi-lo 

Aircraft with reversible flight controls should be fitted with a flying control lock system called a gust lock, so that controls can be locked for parking. They are usually operated by a handle fitted in the flight deck and connected to moveable locking pins by a cable system. When operated the pins are pushed through holes in pulleys/quadrants which lock the control system and prevent movement due to wind loads. 
The system must be designed so that take-off with the gust lock still engaged is impossible. 
Flying Controls 
Powered Flying Controls 
In a fully powered system there is no physical connection between the pilot's controls and the control surfaces and therefore there is no feedback of control forces to the pilot. This type of powered control system is known as an irreversible control and requires some form of artificial feel. If the hydraulic system were to fail, the pilot would not be able to move the controls manually. 
Artificial Feel 
The simplest artificial feel system is spring feel, in which the pilot simply deflects the control column against a spring. These may incorporate a trim system by centring the spring, but there is no relation between the aerodynamic loads and the feedback to the pilot. 

More sophisticated systems insert a synthetic feedback that is proportional to EAS2, sometimes referred to as 'Q', the dynamic force element. An independent pitot static system provides the input of dynamic pressure. Artificial feel systems are often known as 'Q' feel systems. 
Some systems modify this further to give lower control forces at high speed by making the feel proportional only to EAS or, by making the control forces proportional to EAS3, produce artificially high control forces at high speed. 
In the pitch control system 'g' feel is sometimes used which increases control forces as the load factor increases. 
All artificial feel systems operate in parallel to the flying controls, they do not form part of the direct linkage between the control column and the actuator. Artificial feel may also be referred to as a 'force gradient unit'. 
Flying Controls 
Gear Change and Datum Shift 
Gear changing, or ratio changing in a control system is an attempt to match the need for large control deflections at low speed with the need to safeguard the aircraft from overstress at high speed. At a set speed the mechanical advantage of the system is changed, so that full cockpit control deflection gives full control deflection at low speed, but restricted control deflection at high speed. 
This is most often seen in the rudder system, for the rudder, designed to give the yaw necessary to balance thrust asymmetry at low speed is too powerful for normal flight. So a rudder ratio changer system reduces the rudder deflection for a given rudder pedal deflection as the IAS increases. A variable stop system limits both rudder and rudder pedal travel as the IAS increases. 
Another method of rudder limiting, as used on the Boeing 737, is blowback, also called blowdown. With this system the pressure applied through the control system actuators is constant, but the movement of the rudder reduces because of the increase in dynamic pressure on the control surface. Typically this changes from +/-15° on the ground to around +/-8° in the cruise. Blowback is also used in flap systems as a protection against damage from excessive aerodynamic forces. 
ft+iffi-lo 

Gear Change and Datum Shift continued 
Datum shift is an adjustment of the relationship between the control column range of movement and the control range of movement to make the maximum deflection available in the desired sense. At least one modern aircraft has a datum shift in the elevator system that operates at the stall to ensure that full nose down control will be available for recovery. 
Flying Controls 
Power Control Units 
A servo control unit or power control unit (PCU) is a closed loop, or follow-up, servo controller used to actuate powered flying controls. 
PCUs consist of a balanced double acting actuator where the body of the actuator is attached to the flying control surface input and the ram is attached to the structure of the aircraft. The pressure delivered to the PCU comes from the main hydraulic system. 
The pilot's selector is linked to a spool type valve. Moving the selector will pull the spool valve across, opening one side of the actuator to pressure, the other to return. As the fluid acts on the body and piston equally, and the piston is locked to the aircraft structure, the body will move in the same direction as the spool valve. This will move the control surface and at the same time centre the spool valve, holding the control surface in its new position. Ifthere is a hydraulic failure the interconnecting valve drops to break the actuator hydraulic lock, allowing the control to be moved manually. There will be some small dead movement, as the manual linkage has to work through the spool valve. 
ft+EH-lo 


PCUs use main system pressure If pressure is lost the control can be moved manually 
Flying Controls 
ft+Hi-lo 

Mechanical Control Runs Captain's The 8737 aileron system is typical of a fully powered flight control control First officer's control wheel system with mechanical control runs. wheel 
Manual Control 

The control wheels are linked by cable so that they move together, Spoiler control quadrant although this link can be overridden. Control runs are duplicated, one on the Captain's side of the aircraft, one on the First Officer's. \ A system of cables and pulley wheels transmits the control wheel \ movement to an aileron control quadrant, a form of cam, which 
Aileron
then transmits the roll demand to duplicated PCUs. The PCUs act 
Balance tab 
on a central aileron body quadrant which transmits the motion 
Aileron body quadrant
through cables and pulleys to the ailerons themselves. 
Aileron PCUs x 2 ' ,, Aileron -~ Artificial feel and centering unit
Feel and Trim 
autopilot actuator 
A feel and centering unit acts on the other end of the aileron input shaft from the control quadrant in parallel to the mechanical control runs. Both rudder and aileron trim adjust the zero stick 
Control runs are duplicated 
force position so that, when trimmed, the controls are off centre. 

Artificial feel is required Pitch trim is done differently. Power changes, flap settings and fuel burn all create large changes in trim which would be beyond the capability of the elevator. The use of a variable incidence tailplane overcomes this issue. 
Flying Controls 
Feel and Trim continued 
When the pilot trims in pitch the variable incidence tailplane moves a degree or so. Once trimmed the elevator will be in the neutral position and the control column will also be in the neutral position. 
Autopilot Control 
The aileron autopilot actuator acts on the PCU through the feel control unit, this causes the control wheels to move in the correct sense as the autopilot controls the aircraft. 
Safety Features 
Redundancy is achieved by having duplicated control runs. If one ofthe duplicated control runs jams the control wheel on that side ofthe cockpit will also be jammed in roll. The other pilot will be able to override the linkage with sufficient force and then control the aircraft in roll through the second control run. Although, on the B737, this feature only requires force to operate it, on many other aircraft there are specific roll and pitch disconnect switches which are used in the event of a control jam. 
ft++tiilo 
Captain's First officer's control wheel
control wheel 
Spoiler control quadrant 
\ \ 
Aileron Balance tab 
Aileron body quadrant 
Aileron PCUs x 2 ' ,, Aileron -~ Artificial feel and centering unit autopilot actuator 
A jammed control run on one side will still allow the other control wheel to function 
Flying Controls 
Fly-By-Wire Systems 
Fly-By-Wire Systems remove the direct linkage from the control wheel to the PCU. As there is no direct linkage between the control surface and the pilot's control, this is an irreversible control system. 
The advantages of a fly-by-wire systems over conventional systems are that they: 
¦ 
are lighter 

¦ 
require less maintenance 


• 
are self testing 

• 
are more precise (no play or backlash) 

• 
are easy to interface with other electrical equipment (autopilot) 


¦ 
are more responsive 

¦ 
are safer (for example, a computerised system can have built in flight envelope protection) and 

¦ 
reduce pilot workload. 


Although they are fly-by-wire systems, some aircraft such as the 8777 retain the mechanical linkages as shown opposite. 
ft+EH-lo 

Flying Controls 
Control Runs 
As the control wheel is turned to give a roll input, mechanical linkages of pulleys and cables move the second control wheel. Short duplicated control runs take the inputs back to a point, just under the pilots' seats, where the force of the roll application and the displacement ofthe control wheel are sensed by transducers, which convert these inputs into analouge electrical signals. 
In Boeing aircraft the analouge signals are sent to the actuator control electronics (ACE). The ACE takes these inputs, and inputs from other aircraft systems, Primary Flight Control system (PFC) computes a required control deflection and sends digital electronic signals to the second ACE. 
The second ACE converts the signal into an analogue signal which is fed into the PCUs. The feedback is therefore also analogue. 
Actuator 
r 
W--IACEI Digital•IACE rnalogu:1!!!11 CE3====>lliiil Control 
Hand surtace 
control Digital 
IPFCI 


The PCUs operate hydraulically to move the control surface and simultaneously send a position feedback signal to the ACE. When the position feedback signal equals the commanded position the ACE stops the PCU command. 
Flying Controls 
Feel and Trim 
Aileron trim is provided by a mechanical feel and centering mechanism located at the back of and in parallel with the control runs. Trim inputs adjust the central position of the feel and centering mechanism. As the controls are deflected from the neutral trim position springs are compressed to provide artificial feel. 
Autopilot Control 
The autopilot acts with the Primary Flight Computer (PFC) to send signals directly to the ACE. The ACE computes the commands, as before, for the PCUs. The autopilot and PFC commands are also transmitted to backdrive actuators, DC electric motors, which move the control wheels to follow up the autopilot commands. 
Generic Safety Features 
Control jams are still possible in the mechanical linkages near the control wheels, so a breakout mechanism is provided, as before, to allow the other pilot to control the aircraft if a control wheel jams. To avoid errors multiple computers check each other. Not only multiple computers but computers of different types and programming check against each other. 
ft.iiifilo 

Information between computers and other electronic components is via data cable. For safety reasons redundancy is achieved by using multiple data cables. 
Digital systems require feedback as mentioned earlier. The control surface position feedback to the computer is also available to the pilots on a page displaying the position of all the flight controls. To avoid erroneous position reporting multiple control position feedback sensors are used. The idea of multiple sensors is used wherever there are critical components or parameters. 
You might have heard of 'Fred the wheel tapper' stories. His job was to tap train wheels at the end of the day using a special long handled hammer. When struck, the wheel reverberated creating an audible tone like a bell. If the wheel was cracked then the tone was different enabling Fred to identify and report faulty wheels. One day Fred went about his business as usual, except that every wheel created the 'cracked' tone. Fred was no fool, he understood it was very unlikely that every wheel was cracked, so he checked his hammer and found that it was cracked. The message here is: never rely on a single source of information. 
Flying Controls 
Control laws 
As already mentioned, modern aircraft rely on several sophisticated computers to control and protect the aircraft in flight. As computers fail occasionally the system has to be designed to manage the failures safely. Manufacturers create a system of degraded service known as control laws. Airbus use the terms, Normal, Alternate, Direct and Mechanical back up. 
In Normal mode full service is provided, meaning there is full control operation and full protection. 
In Alternate mode, depending on which computers have failed some ofthe protection is lost, e.g. Pitch attitude protection, or Bank angle protection or High AOA protection. 
In Direct Mode, most computer protection is lost and the controls respond to control input in a similar way to manual flight controls. 
Mechanical Back-up Mode, mandated in case of total electrical failure can be achieved in different ways. On Airbus models, the pilots have direct 'old fashioned' control of the rudder and mechanical horizontal stabiliser trimmer by using the trim wheel. There is no aileron or elevator control. On the B777 there are cable controls to the stabiliser and some spoilers. There is no aileron or rudder control. 

Clearly pilot workload will increase further with each mode. Additionally, without flight protection the flight envelope may shrink to avoid flight dangerously close to limits. 
For safety reasons, modern aircraft have multiple control surfaces, e.g. the A320 has one aileron and four spoilers per wing, two pairs of elevators and three rudders, each under control of different computers and different hydraulic systems to reduce the possibility of total control failure. 
Side Sticks 
Airbus aeroplanes use side stick controls with no mechanical linkage between them. The sticks are spring loaded to neutral. Normally only one pilot is in control however, if both pilots make an input then the signals are added algebraically. This function could be useful during pilot training for example. A pilot can choose to take control by pressing a takeover button which de-activates the other stick. 
Flying Controls 
Secondary Flight Control Systems 
Secondary flight controls are flaps and slats, speedbrakes, spoilers and trimming devices. 
Light Aircraft 
Light aircraft may have flaps, possibly have slats and will certainly have some form of trimming device. They will not have spoilers or speed brakes. 
Flaps and Slats 
The operation of leading edge slats can be automatic. As the angle of attack increases, the centre of pressure moves forward on the wing. The pressure differential between the top and bottom of the leading edge is used to extend the slat. At lower angles of attack the pressure on the leading edge closes the slats. 
Flap operation on light aircraft is sometimes unpowered, relying on the pilot for the operating force. More usually the selection is powered either electrically or hydraulically. 
If the selection is powered and the power supply fails, flaps will tend to be slowly blown back in by the aerodynamic forces. 
The speed for flap extension VFE is marked on the air speed indicator as the top of the white arc. 


Flying Controls 
Trim 
On early aircraft trimming was accomplished by fixed tabs on the control surface. 
On later light aircraft trim tabs can be operated from the cockpit, either directly or electrically. Where electrical elevator trim is provided dual switches prevent a single switch failure leading to trim runaway. 



NOTE: The use of 2 switches prevents trim runaway 
Flying Controls 
Large Aircraft 
Secondary flight controls on larger aircraft are always powered, usually by hydraulics but also occasionally by pneumatics or even electrical motors. 
Secondary control usage differs from primary controls in that they are usually selected to a prescribed position and remain there for some time. For example, flaps set to take-off position. If hydraulically powered either by jacks or hydraulic motors they are held in position by hydraulic lock when the selector closes. In the case of electrical actuators a mechanical brake within the actuator is used. 
Flaps and Slats 
Most transport aircraft have both leading edge flaps or slats and trailing edge flaps. The leading edge flaps are either deployed or retracted, but slats can have intermediate positions and trailing edge flaps certainly will. The initial selection may only partly extend the leading edge devices, the next selection may fully deploy them and provide a small amount of trailing edge flap, subsequent selections will increase only the trailing edge flap angle. On retraction the leading edge devices will be retracted last. 


On a large transport aeroplane, the auto-slat system extends (part of) the slats automatically when a certain value of angle of attack is exceeded to improve the stall characteristics. 
Flying Controls 

Flaps and Slats 
This diagram shows flap/slat indicators from a BAe146 on the left and from an A320 on the right. 
Load Limiting Devices 
To prevent a high speed selection overstressing the control surface most aircraft with powered systems are fitted with load limiting protection devices. These devices will limit the pressures to pneumatic and hydraulic systems to prevent extension above the limiting speeds or will auto-retract the flaps and slats at speeds above the limit. This method where aerodynamic forces overrule hydraulic forces is known as a blowback system. 
More sophisticated systems will retract the flaps automatically if the limiting speed is exceeded -though with no change in the flap selection lever -and then automatically extend the flaps again once the speed is back in the safe range for the selected stage of flaps. 
Alpha / Speed Locks 
On the Airbus and other aircraft retraction of the leading edge slats is inhibited if the aircraft is at high alpha or below a minimum airspeed. This system is known as Alpha or Speed Lock. Angle of attack information is fed from the alpha probe and speed data comes from the air data computers. 
HYO 
QTY " .. ,..~,."
FLAPS SLATS 
1066 i •
-UP-g :3 ~ 
~ 
EGT .• 
FOB: 
'411 
-11-111D 
= -15-= 
PNI P 
0 -·O O' 
0 
0
NJ 
0
' ~ 
-28­
-40­
Flying Controls 

Flap and Slat Asymmetry 

If a flap or slat were to fail on one wing but operate on the other Fuselage 
mounted speed

wing it would produce asymmetric lift and drag which could be brake catastrophic. To prevent such an event a protection system is used. They typically work by comparing the position of the flaps/slats on each wing. As soon as there is any discrepancy between the control surfaces, the system is locked in position until 
Spoilers also use
the aircraft has landed. While keeping the aircraft safe, it will limit 

as air brakes and the performance of the aircraft as both flaps and slats have lift dumpers ---=::;--~ 
1 
limiting speeds and cause extra drag. 

Outboard aileron Speedbrakes and Spoilers 
Speed brakes on large aircraft may be tail-mounted, as on the BAe 146 or, more usually double as wing spoilers. The tail mounting 
Inboard aileron 
on the BAe 146 has the advantages that the speed brakes act 
along the axis of the aircraft and therefore cause no pitching moment and that their operation only increases drag, but does not reduce lift. 
Spoilers have an additional function assisting the ailerons in roll control. Spoilers can also be used as rate of descent controllers to give a constant attitude approach. Speed brakes and spoilers will be hydraulically powered. 
Flying Controls 
A 8747-400 landing 
Look at the adjacent movie of a B747-400 landing on a damp day. Before landing the leading edge devices are deployed, in this case Kreuger flaps. On touchdown, the spoilers deploy to destroy lift and create drag. Shortly after, the reverse doors open. Notice spray from the inner engine going into the intake of the outer engine, showing how debris can be blown into the engine during reverse thrust. Notice also that the pilot stops reverse thrust while the aircraft is still going quite fast, this is because below 50 kt or thereabouts, reverse thrust is not very effective. A quirk of this aeroplane is that when reverse is selected the inner and midsection Kreuger flaps are withdrawn leaving only the outer section deployed. 
Flying Controls 
Trim 
Aileron and rudder trim devices on large aircraft with fully powered flight control systems, are usually the centering devices we saw earlier, where the zero force position changes. The result is the same as for manual flight controls, if say 5 degrees of right trim were applied then the zero force position of the control column would be 5 degrees off the centre position. 
While rudder and aileron trim are unlikely to change during flight, there are significant changes to elevator trim with operation of flaps, undercarriage and with fuel burn. Such large changes would leave very little elevator movement around the trimmed position as shown opposite. 
A variable incidence tailplane overcomes this problem by trimming the position of the whole horizontal stabiliser. This is a very powerful trimming mechanism as one degree of stabiliser trim represents several degrees of elevator trim. It creates much less disturbance to the airflow thereby reducing drag. Note that once trimmed, the elevator is back in the central position this means that the elevator control in the cockpit would also be centralised even when a lot of trim is applied, unlike the rudder and aileron controls. To put it in more technical terms, when using a variable incidence tailplane the zero-force stick position does not change with application of trim. 


Reduced elevator movement 

Trim control Full
Tailplane 

elevator control movement 

...... available 
Trim contro 

Tailplane incidence changed to trim aircraft 



Lesson 7 
Landing Gear 

AGK 07 
Land ing Gear 

Landing Gear Types 
There are two designs of undercarriage layout, the tricycle and the tail wheel, also known as the tail dragger. The tricycle gear has the stabilising auxiliary wheel at the front, the tail dragger at the back 
The tail wheel layout is simple and better for rough field operations but gives poor forward visibility and, with the CG behind the main wheels, is dynamically unstable on the ground. Harsh braking can cause tail wheel aircraft to nose over as can strong tailwinds, particularly when the aircraft is parked. 
Modern aircraft have tricycle undercarriages. The normal arrangement is for a nose auxiliary wheel and two main gears. Larger air transport aircraft such as the B747 can also have extra 


gear mounted beneath the fuselage these are referred to as body gear. The landing gear is sometimes referred to as the alighting gear. 
The tail wheel layout is simple but gives poor forward visibility 
Landing Gear 
Function of Landing Gear 
The function of landing gear is: 
¦ 
To absorb the landing loads and dampen vibrations. 

¦ 
To support the aircraft on the ground. 

¦ 
To allow ground manoeuvring. 

¦ 
To withstand side loads. 

¦ 
To withstand aerodynamic loads/ flight air loads. 

¦ 
To give the minimum friction between the ground and the aircraft. 


The landing gear is, of course, only required when the aircraft is on the ground. In flight it adds unnecessary weight to the aircraft and, iffixed, increases the parasite drag. Fixed undercarriages are simple to make but the reduction in flight performance even with drag reducing fairings or spats fitted restricts its use to low performance aircraft. 
If spats are fitted they can become so caked with mud, slush or snow that they have to be removed to be cleaned. Although a pilot can remove them the spats must be refitted by an engineer. 
ft+ii1-lo 

For larger and high performance aircraft the undercarriages are retracted into the wings or fuselage during flight. Hydraulic power is normally used for retraction and extension of the undercarriage, some smaller aircraft do use electrical power. 
In the event of a failure of the normal power source an alternative means of lowering the gear is provided. 
Retractable gear reduces the drag 

While the tricycle layout is tried and tested, and favoured on most modern aircraft, there is an inherent problem with them. In the event of touching down in an incorrect attitude, with the nose gear landing first, then both the nose leg and the fuselage could exceed their design limitations. The usual landing attitude will prevent that from occurring, as the normal touch down sequence will be main (and/or body) gear, followed by the nose gear. 
Land ing Gear 
ftiii1-lo 
Fixed Undercarriages 
Fixed undercarriages for light aircraft can be of a variety of types. The following are some of the more common used: 
¦ 
Cantilever spring. 

¦ 
Rubber bungee. 

¦ 
Oleo pneumatic strut. 




Can "lever ,pring Oleo pneumatic strut 

Rubb r b ngee 
Landing Gear 

Retractable Landing Gear 
Landing gear types
Larger aircraft with retractable undercarriage are usually fitted with oleo pneumatic undercarriage struts. The oleo pneumatic shock absorber can only absorb vertical loads. 
Oleo Pneumatic Strut Configuration 
There are four patterns of landing gear configuration, shown in here. The strongest, as you might expect, is the dual wheel layout. 

Dual wheel 
Landing Gear 
ft+ii1-lo 
Bogies 
On very large aircraft multiple wheels are placed on the same gear unit they are attached together on a structural device called a bogie. A good example is the Boeing 747. The 747 is equipped with four main gear units, each with four-wheel bogies, allowing multiple wheels on a bogie beam on the same undercarriage leg, plus twin nose wheels so that the plane's weight is spread across a total of 18 wheels. A typical bogie is shown in figure 4 with the wheel removed. The bogie beam connects the front and rear axles, to which the wheels are fitted. 

Landing Gear 
fti.H-lo 
Undercarriage Doors 
Undercarriage doors serve one purpose to reduce drag by providing a smooth aerodynamic surface when the undercarriage is retracted. Doors can be simply attached to the undercarriage legs -a cheap option -and others employ complicated mechanisms adding weight and expense. The B737 is an interesting compromise as it has a small door but the wheel remains exposed. 


Landing Gear 

Shock Absorption  
Oleo Pneumatic Shock Absorber Strut  
Oleo pneumatic struts consist of a piston rod that moves up and  
down within a cylinder. The cylinder is fixed to the aircraft's  
structure and an axle is connected to the lower end of the piston  
rod. The cylinder is charged with gas -nitrogen is preferred as it is  
inert -and oil. Mineral hydraulic oil DTD 585 is standard.  
The function of the gas is to support the weight of the aircraft at  
rest and acts as a spring to absorb the landing and taxiing loads.  
The oil is used to control the speed of compression and  
expansion, referred to as dampening of landing load and recoil  
action.  
Nitrogen and DTD 585 is used  
The oil damps the landing load and recoil action  

Landing Gear 
Oleo Pneumatic Shock Absorber without Separator 
Older light aircraft normally use a metering valve and orifice in an un-separated shock absorber. 
As the oleo strut is compressed on landing the gas pressure increases as the length ofthe strut is reduced and the oil is forced to flow up through the orifice in the fixed piston as the volume reduces. The metering rod that is connected to the bottom of the piston and passes though the orifice controls the rate at which the strut compresses. 
During landing load and recoil action the rod and orifice act as a variable restrictor, reducing the flow of oil from one side of the fixed piston to the other. The control ofthe oil flowing back during the recoil action helps to prevent the aircraft from being sprung back into the air. 

a::n
1-----Combined filler plug and inflation valve 
0 0 
.................. +------Oil level 
0 
0 
FRONT SIDE Steering collar


Metering rod 
Nosewheel fork 

Landing Gear 
ft+W+lo 
Oleo Pneumatic Shock Absorber with Separator 
In large aircraft the oleo uses a free-floating separator to ensure that the gas and fluid cannot mix. The speed of compression and recoil is controlled via fixed orifices. During recoil some of the orifices are closed by valves to slow the recoil action. 
When an aircraft is stationary the pressure in the gas equals the weight of the aircraft. Any additional load will cause the oleo to compress further. This must be taken into account when equipment is placed around or underneath the aircraft. 
A heavy landing can result in the oleo strut bottoming out. This occurs when the piston rod travel exceeds the distance available, and can cause damage as the castings meet. 


Land ing Gear 
Oleo setup 
Each oleo will have a correct extension at a given weight. The extension is adjusted by adjusting the gas pressure in the oleo strut. Oil levels must also be correct. If the oil has been leaking the gas pressure can be topped up to restore the extension but there will be more gas than normal and the oil contents will be lower so the strut will be less damped, too bouncy. Conversely, but less likely, a strut overfilled with oil but at the correct extension will have too little gas in it and will be excessively rigid. 


The oleo pneumatic shock absorber can only absorb vertical loads 

Landing Gear 
ft+ii&fto 
Torque Link (Scissor link) 
To prevent the inner piston rod rotating inside cylinder and to ensure that the wheels align with the centre line of the aircraft, a torque link also called a scissor link is fitted. This is attached to the cylinder at one end and the piston rod at the other. A joint in the middle of the torque link allows the oleo to move up and down. If the torque link is worn it can cause rotary movement of the piston within the cylinder this is called nose wheel shimmy. 
Torque links 
Landing Gear 
Shimmy Damper 
Wheel shimmy is described as a sinusoidal motion of the nose wheel when the aircraft is taxiing on the ground. A shimmy damper is either a spring or a hydraulic damper which acts like an accumulator and is used to prevent or dampen these oscillations with an opposing force. Spring systems are used on light aircraft and hydraulic systems for larger aircraft. They can be incorporated as part of the nose wheel steering system. 
---Upper forestay 
Uplock ­
Lower 
Retraction 
forestay
actuator 
Downlock actuator Steering actuators 
Torque link 
Landing Gear 
Retraction and Extension 
Bracing of Retractable Landing Gear 
As just seen the vertical loads on landing are taken by the shock absorber strut however, there are other loads to consider. On touchdown, particularly on a crosswind landing, the side loads on the undercarriage can be large, and then moments later when the brakes are applied a strong fore-aft force is exerted. Once slowed down, taxiing manoeuvres result in torsional forces from the tyres scrubbing being transmitted through the bogies to the struts. Very tight turns should be avoided to limit the torsional stresses on the undercarriage. To deal with such forces bracing struts are required, otherwise the legs are at risk of being torn off. 
Main Gear 
The hydraulically operated retractable landing gears have to be braced to prevent collapse. Main gears that retract sideways have side stays to withstand the side loads and prevent collapse. They also require forestays or drag stays which brace the lower leg and stop it collapsing rearwards. 

Upper Retraction extension sidestay actuator Door retraction actuator 
Lock actuator 
-Shock strut 
l 
Inner door 

Side stays prevent the u/c collapsing sideways. Fore and aft stays prevent the u/c collapsing backwards and forwards. 
Landing Gear 
Nose Gear 
Nose gear and main gears that retract fore or aft require only fore and aft bracing. Drag stays brace forward retracting legs and push stays brace rearward retracting legs. These stays have to be articulated to allow the gear to retract, and be stowed in the smallest space possible. 
---Upper forestay 
Uplock ­Lower 
Retraction forestayactuator 
Downlock actuator 
Torque link 
Drag stays brace forward retracting legs. Push stays brace rearward retracting legs 
Steering actuators 
Landing Gear 
Undercarriage Locks 

Hook lock
Up Locks and Down Locks 
A retractable undercarriage has to be locked when in the up (retracted) and down (extended) positions. The locks prevent the undercarriage from un-commanded extension or collapse. 
Types of Lock Geometric lock 
The geometric or over centre lock is only used as a down lock. It requires mechanical force to unlock it these locks can be formed by using the stays bracing the struts. 
Hook lock 
Hook locks engage without hydraulic pressure but require 


hydraulic pressure to release. Hook locks are normally used as up-locks, with a geometric lock for the down lock, but they can, rarely, also be used as down locks. If hydraulic pressure fails to properly release the lock, hook locks can sometimes be persuaded to let go by manoeuvring the aircraft sharply, obviously within limits, to use the weight of the gear to assist. 
Some light aircraft use a hydraulic lock to lock the landing gear both up and down. 
A geometric lock is only used as a down lock 
Landing Gear 
Landing Gear Position Indications 
Micro switches or proximity switches are fitted to the undercarriage to relay an indication of the gear position. These are linked to indicator lights on the flight deck. 
¦ 
Green lights indicate that the gear is locked down. 

¦ 
Red lights indicate that the gear is unlocked or the gear position disagrees with the lever position. 

¦ 
No lights indicate that the gear is locked up. 


This diagram shows B737 landing gear indicators. 
Land ing Gear 
Landing Gear Position Indications 
On some aircraft both green and red lights illuminate together when the gear has been lowered by emergency means. 
For large aircraft with main wheel bay doors -known as D doors ­a dedicated red light will indicate that they are unlocked. These doors close when the gear is locked down after normal selection to reduce drag and prevent them being damaged on touch down. Hydraulic sequencing valves ensure that the doors open and close at the appropriate times. 
For large aircraft using bogies on the main gears and body gears, an amber truck light indicates if a truck (bogie) is in the wrong position for retraction. When this light illuminates, the gear selector lever is physically locked preventing an up selection being made. The panel shown here is from the Lockheed L1011 TriStar. 
Mechanical indicators are used as a back up should the electrical indicating system fail to indicate gear down and sometimes if it fails to indicate up. These are viewed through panels in the pressure hull or out of the cabin windows. 
The truck light indicates the bogie is in the wrong position for retraction 
Landing Gear 
Most aircraft with retractable undercarriage have a warning system to prevent inadvertent landing with gear up. In older aircraft, low throttle position without flaps would sound a warning horn that could be cancelled provided the flaps were not extended beyond a defined point. In modern aircraft in addition to the throttle position and flap setting, there is usually an input from the ground proximity warning system to give an audible warning "TOO LOW-GEAR". 
Ground Locks 
Ground locks are fitted to the door and leg actuators or linkages to prevent them from moving and allowing the undercarriage to collapse. For ease of spotting them, as some are only small pins, they are painted red and have a red or red and white flag attached to them. Ground locks are always fitted before an aircraft is towed or moved without its main engines running. In the past, pilots have managed to get airborne with one or more of the landing gear locks still fitted. In such a situation it is unlikely the aircraft would be able to fly to its intended destination as both gear down and the associated speed restriction add to the drag. The options would be to land back on departure airfield once a landing mass is achieved or continue en-route, landing early to pick up fuel: either way incurs a cost penalty! To avoid such errors, each aircraft has a set of ground locks, carried in the aircraft in a clear or open fronted container where the Captain can check that they are stowed prior to take off. 


A number of systems such as thrust reverse, lift dump and gear safety locks must only function when the aircraft is on the ground. There are systems that must only function in flight. 
To ensure that these systems operate at the correct stage, an air/ground logic system is used. This system can use micro switches or pressure switches to determine whether the landing gear is in contact with the ground and bearing the aircraft's weight. The micro switches note physical compression of the gear, the pressure switches note increase in pressure in the oleos. These are referred to as Weight on Wheels (WoW), Weight on Ground (WoG) or squat switches. 
Landing Gear 
Gear Selector 
The gear selector has a wheel shaped knob for tactile recognition and must be mounted forward of the throttle or thrust levers. The diagram shows the B737 selector and indicators. 
To prevent an inadvertent wheels up landing, a warning horn is operated if a throttle lever or power lever is retarded past a set position without the gear having been lowered. This will continue to sound until the throttle or power lever is advanced, the gear lowered or the warning horn cutout switch is pressed. The GPWS mode 4A alert provides an additional warning in larger aircraft. 
To prevent inadvertent up selection of the landing gear when on the ground, some aircraft are fitted with a safety latch to physically prevent the gear selector lever from being moved. As a back up, the air/ground logic system prevents the gear from operating when on the ground and, ifthe down lock is of geometric over centre type, this will also prevent retraction. These safety devices are not fitted to all aircraft, especially some of the older types. 
In an emergency, the pilot may be able to override a safety lock and collapse the gear. Should an up selection be made on the ground when the aircraft is stationary, the warning horn will sound and the red gear unsafe light will illuminate. 
The gear selector is shaped like a wheel A squat switch prevents the gear lever being moved on the ground The gear cannot be retracted on the ground if the down lock is 
geometric 
Landing Gear 
Retraction and Extension Sequence 
In light aircraft the selector has two positions -up for gear retraction and down for gear extension. Large transport aircraft often have a third selector position, OFF. This locks the gear in the last selected position but it is normally only selected after the gear is up. 
On retraction and extension the main gears move before the nose gear, this is to ensure that the aircraft does not become unbalanced, as the drag alters. The nose wheel must be straight or the nose gear will not retract this is to prevent the nose wheel damaging the narrow bay. A self-centring mechanism can be used to achieve this. One way restrictor valves are fitted in the return line on extension to prevent the gear lowering too quickly, under both gravity and hydraulic pressure. On some aircraft, automatic braking occurs during gear retraction. 

Landing Gear Operating Speeds 
The landing gear, in particular the doors are not designed to take the same aerodynamic loads as the main airframe. Speed limits are therefore imposed on the operation of the gear and flight with the landing gear extended. 
VLO The maximum speed at which the land gear can be operated. It is possible that the retraction and extension speeds may be different. In this case the speed will be identified as VLo (RET) and 
VLO (EXT)· 
VLE The maximum speed at which the aircraft can be flown with the landing gear extended. VLE is generally a higher speed than VLO. This is because once the gear is extended the undercarriage doors close and the undercarriage legs can withstand higher aerodynamic loads. 
Unlike the flap operating speed, VFE, the landing gear speeds are not marked on light aircraftASls. You do often find the speeds placarded near the selector. 
The nose gear must be straight to be retracted 


Landing Gear 
The aircraft's main hydraulic system is the normal source of power for raising and lowering the gear. In the event of loss of main hydraulic power an emergency method of extending the landing gear must be provided which follows the normal sequence of: unlocking, operating and down-locking. The following are some of the methods provided: 
¦ 
Emergency Hydraulics 

¦ 
Compressed nitrogen gas (blow down) 

¦ 
Mechanical extension 

¦ 
Gravity free fall 


Most modern transport aircraft use gravity to extend the landing gear in emergency. Mechanical linkages powered by electrical motors or compressed gas may be used to release the doors and up-locks. If the gear is lowered using an emergency system the D doors will remain open. Indications may be green and red 
Compressed gas releases the up locks so the gear can fall under 
together on the control panel. If there is a designated emergency 
gravity 
gear lowering speed this will be lower than the normal operating speed. 
On some aircraft an additional emergency extension lever is fitted. In an emergency the gear is selected down normally and then the emergency extension lever is operated. The emergency extension control may need to have a safety latch removed before it can be operated. 



Lesson 8 
Steering and Braking Systems 

AGK08 
Steering and Braking Systems 
ft+IHhlo 
Steering 
Steering of aircraft for ground manoeuvring is achieved in various ways. Older tail dragging aircraft with a castoring tailwheel use differential braking and aerodynamic forces from the rudder. Rudder forces can be increased by increasing propeller rpm. On light aircraft with tricycle landing gear steering is normally achieved by mechanically connecting a steerable nose wheel to the rudder bar. This, of course, will limit the range of movement to that of the rudder. Tighter turns can sometimes be achieved by the use of differential braking in this case, the nose gear is moved to the limit of the rudder bar but is free to castor to a greater angle under the influence of differential braking. 
Some aircraft do not have any steering connection to the rudder but have fully castoring nose wheels. These aircraft are steered by the use of differential braking, power and rudder only. To reduce shimmy this system makes use of a twin contact tyre called a Marstrand tyre in addition to a shimmy damper. 
Shimmy, defined as a sinusoidal movement of the nosewheel in the longitudinal axis, must be controlled or damped, otherwise the shimmy could damage the nose gear and would certainly make steering difficult. 


Steering and Braking Systems 
Steering continued 
Damping can be by the use of small hydraulic shock absorbers, or by using a silicon fluid that changes its viscosity in reaction to the speed of movement between fixed and rotating components. 
Shimmy dampers reduce the severity of shimmy but do not eliminate it. Although shimmy is generally associated with nose wheels it can affect mainwheels, particularly when bearings are worn. 
Nose gear needs to be centred on retraction, as already mentioned. Most designs allow for two cams that mate together as the leg extends off load. As the two cams meet the fixed cam forces the moveable cam to follow it, moving the gear to the centreline position before retraction. 
Failures in some centering mechanisms have attracted adverse publicity, such as the JetBlue A320 which landed at LAX in September 2005 with the gear stuck 90° out of alignment. 
ft.ii+lo 


Steering and Braking Systems 
Large Aircraft Nose Wheel Steering 
Larger transport aircraft have a dedicated hydraulically powered nose wheel steering system. At low speeds the pilot uses a tiller or control wheel to pivot the nose gear through 75°. On very large air transport aircraft the body gear is automatically activated beyond 20° of nosewheel deflection and will steer in the opposite direction to the nose wheel to reduce the turning radius. 
The rudder pedals will still turn the nose wheel up to 7° either side of the neutral. This 'rudder fine nose wheel steering' allows limited control when the pilots' hands are off the tiller, during take-off and landing, and permits the autopilot rudder channel to steer the aircraft on the ground during an autoland. 
For large aircraft the smallest radius turn can be achieved by using differential braking, nose wheel and body gear steering all together. In general, though, tight radius turns should be avoided whenever possible and never carried out at anything other than a very slow speed in order to prevent damage to tyres and reduce the sideways stresses on the undercarriage. During tight turns the loads are particularly high on the torque links of bogie type gear. 
Pilots of swept wing aircraft need to be particularly careful in ground manoeuvring as the radius of turn of the wingtip and tailplane is greater than that of the pilot's eye position. 
ft+it+lo 
,
,, 
I , 
Steering ,' angle 75° ,' ' 
Left hand ·---. ••
.
. u/c wheel track 
I 
,
, 

' ,, 
' 
---. 
... _____ _ 
Ground manoeuvre capability 

This means that, just because the cockpit clears an obstacle, it does not mean to say the wingtip will. This is called 'swept wing growth'. 
Castoring nose wheels use Marstrand tyres to control shimmy 
Steering and Braking Systems 
Wheel Brakes 
Introduction 
Reverse thrust helps to slow a landing aircraft but the greatest retardation comes from the brakes. 
On light aircraft passive hydraulically operated single disc brakes are normally used to convert the kinetic energy of the aircraft into heat energy through friction. On larger aircraft hydraulic powered multi-plate disc brakes are used. 
A single disc brake consists of a disc rotating with the main wheel and a caliper unit attached to the main gear leg. Each brake unit is connected to a master cylinder attached to the toe brake pedal on the pilot's rudder bar. The pilot pressing down on the toe brake pedal creates hydraulic pressure this is transmitted to the caliper unit where a piston squeezes the disc between two friction pads. On releasing the brakes a small spring returns the piston to its former position. 
For light aircraft the rate of braking is controlled totally by the pilot. The ideal condition is where the wheels are turning slightly slower than the aircraft's forward speed. Ifthe pilot slows the wheels to a point where they are turning too slowly then a skid can develop. This may lead to loss of braking efficiency, loss of directional control, a flat spot in the affected tyre and ultimately a burst tyre. 

Single disc brake Brake unit housing Operating pad Fixed pad Torque plate 
Operating piston 
Disc 

Braking effectiveness reduces if the aircraft skids 
Steering and Braking Systems 
Brake Wear 
Any use of the brakes will result in wear of both the friction material ofthe pads and the disc this wear must be checked after every flight with the brakes applied. A measurement is taken between the disc and the brake housing, using a rule, a gauge or special tool. As the disc wears down in thickness the amount of heat energy that it is able to absorb is reduced, thus reducing the ability of the brakes to stop the aircraft. 
Single disc brake wear is measured between the disc and the housing when the brakes are on. 
If the brake disc becomes so hot that it is unable to absorb further heat the braking action ceases. This is called brake fade. 
Overheated brakes make chattering and squealing noises. Should the brake disc and pads fail to separate after the brakes are released, the brake is said to be dragging or binding. Dragging will increase brake temperatures. 
ft.ii+lo 

Measuring brake wear 
Disc Fixed pad 

Brake wear is checked with the brakes applied 
Brakes with steel discs work best when cold, carbon fibre brakes work best when hot Overheated brakes fade 
Steering and Braking Systems 
Steel and Carbon brakes 
Traditionally brake discs were made from steel but they are being replaced by carbon brakes which have several advantages. The main disadvantages with steel brakes are weight and brake fade at high temperatures. The main disadvantage with carbon brakes was price so use of carbon brakes was limited to long haul aircraft where the weight saving reduced fuel costs. For example, the weight saving on a 8767 is around 800 lbs. However, carbon brake prices have reduced and fuel prices risen so many modern aircraft now use carbon brakes. 
What are the other advantages of carbon brakes? First, they don't suffer from brake fade, in fact the reverse is true, as braking friction increases with an increase in temperature. Second, they can operate at higher temperature than steel brakes without suffering from distortion or structural damage. Third, they can absorb more energy than steel brakes. Fourth, they can dissipate heat energy more quickly than steel brakes so they cool more quickly. The combination of these four things means they are better at dealing with a large braking effort such as an aborted take-off. Regardless of brake type, heavy braking converts huge amounts of kinetic energy into heat and even carbon brakes have an upper temperature limit. 

After such braking there is normally a waiting period to allow the brakes to cool prior to another take-off. Brake temperature gauges help the pilots to estimate the waiting period and check that the brakes are cool enough to attempt a take-off. 
Other than cost what are the disadvantages of carbon brakes? In short, they don't work so well when cold and they wear quickly when cold. This influences how they might be used during taxi. 
Steering and Braking Syst ems 
ftiH+lo 
Taxi Braking Recommendations 
Carbon and steel brakes wear differently, so different taxi techniques are recommended for each type of brake. 
Steel brake wear is directly proportional to the kinetic energy absorbed by the brakes. Maximum brake life can be achieved by using a large number of small applications. High aircraft masses and speeds tend to reduce brake life because of the large amounts of kinetic energy absorbed. 
On the other hand, carbon brakes are less sensitive to aircraft mass, instead wear depends of the number of brake applications -one firm application results in less wear than several lighter applications. Therefore, it is recommended that the aircraft be permitted to accelerate to a higher speed during taxi followed by a single firm application to reduce speed rather than trying to maintain a constant taxi speed as with steel brakes. 
These are guidelines only, safety and passenger comfort remain the primary considerations. 


Steering and Braking Systems 
Multi Disc Brakes 
Large air transport aircraft use multi disc and multi piston brakes as these are able to absorb more kinetic energy. Traditionally, brakes have been hydraulically operated but recently designers are moving towards electric brakes as they are lighter, and cabling is easier to install and more reliable than piping. However, the current syllabus refers to hydraulic brakes which use the aircraft main hydraulic system for normal power supply on occasions the main system pressure is reduced by means of a pressure reducing valve downstream of the brake accumulator. 
Under manual braking the pilot operates the brake master cylinders with the toe pedals. The low hydraulic pressures created by the brake master cylinders operate a brake control valve that determines how much system pressure should be applied to the wheel brakes. 

ft++++fo 
Pressure plate 
Adjuster assembly Disc pack and wear indicator 
~ 
Mounting ~ bolt 
"I ~ 
Torqueplate 
Operating piston Torque tube and cylinder Double stator 
Single stator assembly Rotor segment assembly 

Multi-disc brake 
The pressure reducing valve is downstream of the brake accumulator 
Steering and Braking Systems 
Multi Disc Brake Construction 
The body of a multi-disc unit is made up of a torque plate, a torque tube and a thrust ring. The torque plate is attached to the main gear leg and, as its name suggests, is designed to withstand the torque reaction of braking. The thrust ring is attached to the torque plate via the torque tube. The torque plate houses a series of interlinked single acting actuators and wear adjusters. The actuator pistons act on a pressure plate. The disc pack is between the pressure plate and the thrust ring this consists of alternate brake discs and friction plates. 
The discs have external lugs known as tenons, and these locate into drive blocks located on the wheel. The friction plates have lugs located on the inner circumference these locate over the castellation of the torque tube. The discs are referred to as rotors, the friction plates as stators. 
In ideal conditions, with a dry surface, it would be possible to put in more braking energy than the landing gear and attachment points are designed to cope with. This is because the brake pistons are over-sized so that they will provide the necessary braking action with wet discs and pads in adverse weather. To overcome this problem brake torque limiters are fitted that dump some of the brake pressure back to the hydraulic system as the design brake torque limits are approaching. 
ft+M+fo 
Pressure plate Disc pack Thrust plate
Adjuster assembly and wear indicator Thrust ring 
~ 
Mounting ~ bolt 
Torqueplate 
Operating piston 
Torque tube and cylinder Double stator Single statorassembly 

Rotor segment assembly 
Multi-disc brake 

In operation the pressure plate pushes the whole pack across onto the thrust ring. Because the heat energy absorbed by the multi-disc brake is so great, the discs are often made up of segments to allow for expansion and prevent warping. These are linked together the jigsaw plate is a common system of linking. 
Steering and Braking Systems 
Automatic Brake Wear Adjuster 
Automatic brake wear adjusters are used to make sure that there is adequate clearance between the rotors and the stators when the brakes are off. These consist of a housing, a guide, a spring, a retraction pin and a friction bush. The housing is attached to the torque plate, located inside the housing is the guide which incorporates the friction bush and the spring. The head of the retraction pin is held by the pressure plate, the pin passes through the torque plate and friction bush to protrude out of the end of the housing. 
The distance between the torque plate and the pressure plate is indicated by how much the retraction pin sticks out. When the brakes are applied the pressure plate pulls the pin with it, the friction in the bush holds the guide onto the pin, so the guide moves with the pin which in turn compresses the spring. When the brakes are released the spring's force pulls the pressure plate back, allowing the disc pack to separate. 
Brake pads  
Spring housing  
Retraction  
pin  
Guide  
Adjuster  
spring  
Torque plate  Pressure plate  

Steering and Braking Systems 
Automatic Brake Wear Adjuster continued 
As the pack wears, the guide will bottom before the pressure plate stops moving, so the pin is pulled through the friction bush. On release the guide returns to its original position so the pressure plate will be pulled back the same distance. 
The brake wear can be measured using the distance between the retraction pin and the housing. Some pins have a mark around them, when this is proud of the housing the brake wear is acceptable. Whatever method is used, special tool, gauge, rule or indication, the actual measurement is being taken between the torque plate and the pressure plate. 
Brake pads 
Spring housing 
Retraction pin 
Guide 
Adjuster spring 
Torque plate Pressure plate 
The distance between the torque plate and the pressure plate is 
indicated by how much the retraction pin sticks out 
Steering and Braking Systems 
Anti-Skid 
Maximum braking is achieved when the maximum torque is applied to the wheel in opposition to rotation. If too much torque is applied the wheel locks and a skid develops with reduced friction between the wheel and surface reducing braking efficiency. Anti ­skid systems are fitted to prevent the brakes 'locking up' the wheels by releasing brake pressure before the wheel stops turning thereby achieving optimum braking performance. Anti­skid systems operate: 
¦ 
In normal conditions 

¦ 
In icy conditions 

¦ 
In wet conditions 


It is normal for anti-skid to be selected 'on' for every landing and take off. 
There are two methods of skid control, the Maxaret (mechanical), and the electronic. The electronic system is more modern and more effective. 
Both systems function by controlling the hydraulic pressure that is felt in the brake unit. By releasing some ofthe pressure the wheel will be allowed to speed up again before full system pressure is reapplied. 

This keeps each brake unit braking and at the optimum which is a point just before the skid. 
If a wheel locks when the aircraft is rolling the system will fully release the brakes on that wheel until it spins back up, this is called locked wheel skid control. At taxi speeds, typically below a speed of 20 KT, the anti-skid system is inoperative so the aircraft can be brought to a halt. The system is also inoperative when the parking brakes are applied. 
If fitted and serviceable anti-skid will be on for take-off and landing 
Not all the brake pressure is released. Anti-skid is inoperative below 20 KT 
Steering and Braking Systems 
Maxaret System 
The Maxaret system is an older hydro-mechanical method of anti­skid not found on modern aircraft. It mechanically senses the speed of the wheel, a skid causes this to drop to a point where a valve opens, allowing some of the pressure in the brake to bleed to return. This system uses the modulating valve described in the hydraulics section of these notes. 

Application of the park brake . -. . . . 
. • ..........•........ -......•....•. . •. applies pressure :· • • • • • • • • • • .. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
to all wheels I f Normal and 
: ,__ reserve sources ·--­
Anti-skid 
system 
Anti-skid controller 
Anti-skid
• 

Maxarets are hydro-mechanical 


Steering and Braking Systems 
Electronic Anti-Skid 
Electronic anti-skid units use a tachogenerator that is driven by the wheels. The tachogenerator produces an electric signal that varies with speed. This signal is sent to the anti-skid controller where wheel speed is compared with the aeroplane reference speed. If a wheel is turning too slowly the anti-skid controller will electrically signal an anti-skid valve to release sufficient pressure from the brake unit so that the wheel can speed up. Conversely, if the pilot is using manual braking and applying maximum force to the brake pedals, the anti-skid system will maintain a specified slip ratio to achieve the highest retardation possible in the conditions. 
In the case of hydroplaning the system will detect a high slip rate and reduce the pressure to restore wheel rotation. 
The inputs to a modern anti-skid computer are: 
¦ 
Idle Wheel Speed (measured). 

¦ 
Braked Wheel speed. (measured). 

¦ 
The desired wheel slip rate. 



Application of the park brake . . . . . . 
. • ..........•...............•....•. . •. applies pressure :· • • • • • • • • • • .. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
to all wheels I f Normal and 
: ,__ reserve sources ·--­
Anti-skid 
system Anti-skid 
contr•oller 
i-skid ret Anti-skid 



Steering and Braking Systems 
Touchdown and Bounce Protection 
To stop the wheel brakes being fully applied and locking the wheels up before landing a protection circuit is sometimes fitted in the control unit to prevent the brakes being applied. This means a pilot can, in theory, land with anti-skid on and his feet hard on the toe brakes without damaging the tyres. Needless to say, this is not the recommended operational practice. 
If a wheel bounces after touchdown there is a possibility that the brakes will lock up the wheel before it touches down again. Bounce protection senses the wheel's lift off and releases the brake pressure from the affected unit. It then delays the re­application of the brake until the wheel has touched down and started to rotate. 

Failure Indications 
If the anti-skid system fails an amber warning light alerts the crew, the same light will be illuminated if the system is selected off. The braking system reverts to manual operation without anti-skid the event offailure. Failure of the anti-skid system has serious effects on both take-off and landing performance, leading to a 50% increase in landing distance. 
Failure of the anti-skid system can lead to a 50% increase in landing distance 
Steering and Braking Systems 
Automatic Braking 
Auto Brake is a modern system that can bring the aircraft to a complete stop using constant g deceleration. This reduces stress on the airframe and greatly enhances passenger comfort during the landing. 
The auto brake system uses anti-skid therefore auto brake can only function with a serviceable anti-skid. The pilot selects the desired rate of deceleration on an auto brake control panel before take-off and landing. 
Prior to landing the pilot will normally select a rate of deceleration. The selections vary between aircraft. The diagram opposite shows a Boeing 737 with 1,2,3 and MAX. 
Steering and Braking Systems 
Automatic Braking continued 
The diagram opposite shows an Airbus A380 panel with LO, 2 3 and HI. The MAX selection is confusing because it is not maximum braking effort but the highest value of a fixed deceleration rate. To avoid confusion, Airbus changed the name from MAX to HI. To reiterate, each setting is a specified deceleration rate. 
Both panels, shown opposite and on the previous page, also have a rejected take-off selection, mentioned later in this lesson this does give the maximum braking effort. 
The A380 has an interesting switch position called BTV meaning Brake To Vacate. The pilots can insert the landing runway into the system and select a turn off. The braking will be to a value such that the aircraft will be at 10 KT when it reaches the turn off. It is claimed to save around 20% wear on brakes and tyres and minimise runway occupancy time. The aircraft will also inform the pilots if the runway is too short in both wet and dry conditions. 
Steering and Braking Systems 
Automatic Braking continued 
When the aircraft touches down the brakes are applied once the thrust levers have been retarded to idle and the wheels have spun up to speed. Brake system hydraulic pressure is directed to the brakes and the auto brake controller compares the aircraft's rate of deceleration to the selected rate and varies the pressure accordingly. 
The selection of reverse thrust, and spoilers will reduce braking force to maintain the selected deceleration rate. The system can be used to bring the aircraft to a complete stop in an auto land situation. The anti-skid system and the runway conditions (slippery runway) will determine the absolute maximum braking available for the landing. The pilot can alter the demanded rate of deceleration while the aircraft is braking. 
If the pilot presses the toe brakes when auto brake is selected, the system automatically cancels, and the braking reverts to manual with anti-skid. Modern aircraft will usually both land and take-off with auto braking selected, older aircraft only use it for take-off. 

Application of the park brake 

. • ... • • • .. • • • applies pressure :· • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • ·: 
to all wheels : f Normal and : reserve sources 
Anti-skid Metering valve system Anti-skid 
controller ~ 
Anl s~d ~ 

Auto braking is cancelled by pressing the 
brake pedals or by de-selecting it 


Steering and Braking Syst ems 
Rejected Take-Off (RTO) 
Maximum Braking is applied when RTO is selected. If the take-off is abandoned before lift-off as the thrust levers are retarded the auto brake system will apply the brakes at the maximum deceleration possible. This is not a set deceleration rate it is maximum braking effort. 
Again, if the pilot touches the toe brakes when auto brake is selected, the system automatically cancels, and the braking reverts to manual with anti-skid. After a heavy weight RTO, the tyres on the main wheels are likely to need to be changed. 
Maximum auto brake is a set deceleration rate and will not slow the aircraft down as quickly as RTO. 
Should the auto-brake system fail the controller will revert to normal anti-skid and a fail light will illuminate. 
In-flight braking. 
On most aircraft the wheel brakes are automatically applied when the gear is selected to 'UP'. The idea is to protect components in the wheel well from loose tread on a spinning wheel. Nose wheels don't have brakes so a snubber (brake pad) fitted in the wheel well retards the wheels on retraction. 
A rejected take-off trashes the tyres 
Steering and Braking Syst ems 
The three modes of operation 
The auto brake system has three modes of operation: OFF, ARMED and Activated/Deactivated. 
OFF -The auto brake system will not function. The pilot will use manual braking with anti-skid if it is available. 
ARMED prior to taxi -During taxi prior to take off the pilot selects Rejected Take Off (RTO), Normal braking for taxi can be used but RTO mode is now armed but not activated. To activate, the aeroplane must exceed a target speed, typically around 70 kts and the pilot must have selected idle power. On the B737, the spoilers will deploy and full pressure is applied to the brakes. 
ARMED during flight for landing. -Prior to landing the pilot selects the required braking. The system is now armed. It activates when landing by wheel spin up and power levers to idle. 
The system is normally deactivated by the pilot depressing the brake pedals to take control of the brakes. 


Steering and Braking Systems 

Brake Temperatures 


Excessive brake temperatures reduce braking effectiveness and create a fire risk. To reduce the heat in the brake units electrically controlled cooling fans may be fitted, switching on and off as required. 
An indication of brake temperature is given to the pilot either on an analogue gauge or via numbers in boxes on the ECAM or EICAS screen. 
A mechanical gauge is shown here. When the switch lights for individual brakes are selected the gauge will show individual brake temperatures, only one can be selected at any one time. When no brakes are selected the gauge will show the highest brake temperature. Brake overheats are indicated by the switch light showing OVHT. 
Brake overheat indications can be amber, red or white according to type. 
Brake overheat indications can be amber, red or white according to type 
Steering and Braking Systems 
Brake Temperatures 
This is an electronic brake temperature indicating system where temperature of each brake is shown as a number in a box, the numbers and outline of the box change colour as the temperature increases, on this system 3 and white are the hottest. 
Any brake overheats must be reported to the Fire section via ATC and the aircraft must not be refuelled until the brakes have been checked. Operations Manuals would also prevent the aircraft being moved until the brakes cool down. This can take up to an hour and can prove embarrassing some airports have giant mobile air cooling units which can assist. 
A brake overheat will immobilise the aircraft for some time. 
Steering and Braking Systems 
Parking Brake 
All aircraft have a parking brake system that locks hydraulic pressure into the wheel brakes. Where the parking brake uses a separate power source it can be used in an emergency, as a means to stop the aircraft. The parking brake disengages anti­skid and there is no differential control of the brakes. 
Emergency Braking Systems 
It is a certification requirement that if there is any system or component failure the aircraft must be brought to a controlled stop within 1.5 times the normal braking distance. If the hydraulics completely fail an accumulator in the brake circuit will provide a limited number of braking applications (about 6) 
An emergency braking power source may be provided and can be supplied by compressed gas or from dedicated electrical pumps that pressurise the wheel brake accumulators. This system also allows operation of brakes when the aircraft is towed on the ground without having to start the main engines. 
When an emergency brake selection is made the anti-skid system is made inoperative. 

Stopping in the Shortest Possible Distance 
As we have seen aircraft braking systems, at least on large aircraft, are fitted with anti-skid units. This means the most effective braking occurs with the brakes fully applied and the anti­skid units fully operating. On a jet most of the retardation on the landing run or rejected take-off comes from the brakes rather than the thrust reversers. 
The shortest possible landing distance will be achieved by crossing the threshold at the correct height and speed, applying maximum foot pedal braking with anti-skid on touch down, and by applying reverse thrust and extending the speed brakes or lift dumping devices as soon as possible. 
If the hydraulics completely fail the brake accumulator will give limited braking 
The shortest stopping distance is obtained by applying maximum foot pedal braking with anti-skid and thrust reversers or for a rejected take-off RTO setting and thrust reversers 
Steering and Braking Systems 

B737NG Controls and Indicators 
Centre Instrument Panel 
On the Boeing 737NG the landing gear selector and auto-brake controls are located in the centre of the main instrument panel. 


Steering and Braking Systems 
Centre Console 
The parking brake lever and warning light, and the landing gear warning horn cut-out switch, are located on the centre console. 
Parking brake warning light 



Lesson 9 
Wheels and Tyres 

AGK 09 
Wheels and Tyres 
ft+IF·Ho 
Wheels and Tyres 
Aircraft wheels and tyres are designed to withstand high speeds and impact loads. As aircraft landing speeds and weights have increased, large low-pressure tyres have given way to smaller 
SPLIT HUB
high-pressure tyres. This has allowed them to be retracted into smaller wheel bays and the use of bogies allows four or more wheels on one leg to share the load. 
Wheels 

There are three different types ofwheels which are also referred to as hubs, these are: 
DETACHABLE 
¦ Well based 
FLANGE 
¦ 
Detachable flange 

¦ 
Split hub 



Well based wheels are used for motor cars. Aircraft tyres are so stiff they cannot be fitted by stretching them over the rim of a well based wheel. The construction of the wheels varies slightly depending on if the tyre fitted is tubed or tubeless. Small, high pressure tyres are most common 
The detachable flange wheel, as its name suggests, has a flange that can be removed. When a tyre has been fitted the flange is held in place by a locking ring. The pressure in the tyre forces the flange onto the locking ring making it secure. 

Wheels and Tyres 
ft.ifid o 
Wheels 
Inflation valve L ..... 
The split hub wheel is the common commercial aircraft wheel. The hub is designed to split in two parts and these are cross­bolted together. 
SPLIT HUB 
The wheels used with tubeless tyres need to form gas tight seals. Detachable flange and split hub wheels will have seals fitted between their mating surfaces to prevent leakage. The cast alloy used for the construction of the wheels may not be air tight. This requires the wheels to be coated with a lacquer to seal them. 
Wheels for use with tube tyres have knurled flanges this is to 
DETACHABLE 
assist in preventing the tyre slipping around the wheel. 
FLANGE 



Wheels and Tyres 
ft+itido 
Tyres 
Manufacturer 
Pneumatic tyres are used on aircraft to support the aircraft on the 
I 

ground and assist in absorbing shock loads. Modern transport Test specification aircraft are inflated with nitrogen gas as it is inert and will not 
Load rating ~ 
support combustion in the event of a blow out or wheel fire. 
LightSpeed rating 
spot
The tyres provide the necessary friction between the aircraft and the surface for braking and steering and can be designed to make electrical contact between the aircraft and the ground and dissipate any static charge of the aircraft. 
Two types of tyre are used. They can be either tubed or tubeless. Tubeless tyres have many advantages and are used for most commercial airliners. 
Awl marks 
As with motor vehicles, aircraft tyres have a maximum speed rating, often 225 MPH. The speed rating is based on practical testing to ensure the tyre remains safe. At high aircraft weights and high-density altitudes the tyre speed limit may restrict the aircraft Maximum Take-Off Mass. 
Size 
Wheels and Tyres 
Tyre Construction 
Tyres are not fabricated just from rubber they would be too weak and flexible. Within the rubber are a series of plies of cord and steel that acts as reinforcement. 
The tyre construction starts with the bead, which is formed around a series of steel wire rings laid side by side, around which strands of nylon or rayon are layered each strand is coated in rubber. These are built up in layers, collectively referred to as the carcass these give the tyre its strength. 
The tyre's strength is indicated by its ply rating, an 8 ply tyre being stronger than a 6 ply, the higher the number the stronger the tyre. If the layers of the carcass are laid across each other at an angle the tyre is called a cross ply (or bias ply, an older term). 
In a radial ply tyre the carcass plies run from bead to bead ­radially. To add further strength additional belts of steel or Kevlar are added to the radial tyres with the ply running circumferentially, in the direction of travel. This outer belt also helps the tyre to resist punctures. 
Aircraft tyres can be remoulded (retreaded) several times when they are worn by bonding new rubber to the carcasses. 
Steel wire core 
The ply rating indicates the strength of the tyre 
Wheels and Tyres 
ft+++·•­
Tyre Construction 
A tyre is divided into four zones these are: 
¦ 
The crown -the area with the tread pattern designed to take the wear. 

¦ 
The shoulder -where the cross section of the tyre thins from the crown to the sidewall. 

¦ 
The sidewall -which has the thinnest walls and is not designed to take any wear. 

¦ 
The bead -the strong part of the tyre designed to grip the rim of the wheel. 




Crown Shoulder 
Sidewall 
Bead 
Wheels and Tyres 

n +e+•o 
Tubed Tyres  
Tubed tyres use an inner tube of gas resistant rubber as a bladder  
to hold the inflation medium, usually nitrogen for transport aircraft.  
The inner tube has a thin inflation tube and valve that protrudes  
through a hole in the wheel.  
When a new tyre is fitted to a wheel it takes up to five landings for  
the bead to bed in against the knurled wheel flange properly.  
During this time the friction on landing can cause circumferential  
movement of the tyre in relation to the wheel flange, called tyre  
"creep".  
To monitor the creep, a bar is painted across the wheel flange and  
tyre called a creep mark. It is 1" (25 mm) wide for tyres of 24" (60  
cm) or less in diameter and 1.5" (37 mm) for wheels over 24" (60  
cm) diameter. The maximum permissible creep is indicated when  
the edge ofthe tyre mark aligns with the opposite edge of the  
wheel mark. This range limits the stress on the inflation valve of  
the inner tube.  
Aircraft tyres are inflated with nitrogen  
Maximum creep is 1" or 1.5" for wheels over 24"  

Wheels and Tyres 
Tubeless Tyres 
In the construction of tubeless tyres, a layer of gas resistant rubber like butyl is applied to the inner surface of the tyre. The side wall has a radial construction which makes the tyre more flexible and a chamfered bead provides a better fit to the wheel. This design has many advantages over the tube tyre. They are: 
¦ The tyre is lighter (no tube) 
• 
The tyre runs cooler (no friction between tube and tyre) 

• 
Lower risk of bursting (when punctured) 


¦ There is no inflation valve to rip out 
• 
Better adjustment to the wheels (no knurled flange required) 

• 
The tyre is more flexible 


It must be remembered that tubeless tyres need to be fitted to wheels designed for their use. 
ft+HUo 

The maximum permitted creep is: 
• 
Reached after 5 landings 

• 
1.5 inches for tyres of 24 inches or less in diameter and 1 inch for wheels over 24 inches diameter 


• Indicated when the edge of the tyre mark aligns with the opposite edge of the wheel mark 
• As specified on the manufacturers markings on the tyre wall 
Wheels and Tyres 
Tyre Markings 
Along with other markings, moulded into the rubber of the sidewall are: 
¦ 
the maximum ground speed, 

¦ 
the ply rating, and 

¦ 
the manufacturers recommended operating pressure. 


Around the bead of a tubeless tyre are a series of small green or grey paint marks, called awl marks. Awl marks indicate where small holes were made during manufacture to let entrapped gasses out. A tyre must have these marks. 
There will be a red spot painted on the sidewall: this indicates the light spot of the tyre which will be placed against the inflation adapter in the wheel, which is the wheel's heavy spot unless otherwise marked with a B. There will of course be creep marks on the tyre as well, if it is a tubed tyre. 
Speed rating ­Ply rating 
Awl marks are normal and occur in manufacture A red spot indicates the lightest point of the tyre 
Wheels and Tyres 

n +e+•o 
Tread Patterns 

Tread patterns are designed to clear surface water, and provide ~­
-· 

longitudinal stability, or directional grip. There are two main tread -¦ 
patterns: -·
-· ••

¦ Circumferential grooves provide excellent longitudinal stability and water clearance. They are the standard tread ¦I pattern for commercial aircraft using concrete/tarmac ¦I 
¦I
runways. 
¦I 

¦ Block tread, sometimes called all weather tyres. They are ¦I normally used for aircraft that are likely to land on rough or unmade strips. 
••-· 
._.._ 
-·-¦
..... 
,_ _ 
-~ 
Ribbed tread tyre Blocktread tyres 

Wheels and Tyres  
Marstrand Tyre and Chined Tyres  
The Marstrand tyre is a single tyre used on castoring nose wheels.  
It has two contact areas, this double contact, helps to eliminate  
shimmy as each area will resist the oscillation. These tyres can be  
used as the contact areas wear away until the centre section  
starts to contact the ground.  
A chined tyre has a strip of rubber that is moulded onto one or both  
sides of the tyre. These chine's deflect the water displaced by the  
tread back onto the runway. They can be used on either the nose  
or the main wheels and are often used to prevent water ingestion  
by engines mounted behind the wheels.  
Marstrand tyre  Chined tyre  
Marstrand tyres reduce shimmy on castoring nose wheels  
Chined tyres deflect water and spray  


Wheels and Tyres 
Tyre Wear 
For a grooved tyre the minimum tread allowed is 2 mm measured from the bottom of the groove. Some tyres have reinforced treads. Tyres of this type have a rubber block in the grooves that indicates the 2 mm depth these blocks are called marker tie bars. 
Block tread tyres can be used until the pattern ofthe tread is just discernible. 
ft.iiiiWo 
Wear indicating groove 
l
Marker tie bar 
Minimum tread is 2 mm on a grooved tyre 
There must be visible tread on a blocked tyre 

Wheels and Tyres  
Tyre Damage  
Aircraft tyres are designed for the short duration, high-speed loads  
of normal take off and landing. Tyre damage can be caused by  
high taxy speed, low tyre pressure, hard landings, excessive load,  
runway surface faults, contamination and ageing. The  
recommended maximum taxy speed is 22 mph, often given as 20  
KT.  
When the carcass of the tyre is damaged a blister on a sidewall  
indicates that the plies of the carcass are delaminating. The tyre  
must be replaced.  
Too low a tyre pressure will cause excessive wear on the  
shoulders. Too high a tyre pressure will cause excessive wear on  
the crown. This diagram illustrates excessive shoulder wear  
caused by low inflation pressure.  
Tyre pressures that are too high cause wear on the crown,  
pressures that are too low cause wear on the shoulder  

Wheels and Tyres 
Tyre Damage continued 
Rough runway surfaces will score and cut the tyres. If these are deep enough to sever the plies the tyre is said to be cut to cords and must be changed. If these cuts are not as deep as the cords the cut can be filled with tyre putty. Heavy braking on a cross­grooved runway when it is dry causes a series of chevron shaped cuts. Any object that penetrates the tyre should be left in situ and expert advice taken. 
Oil or solvents spilt on a tyre can damage the rubber causing it to become soft and spongy the contaminants must be removed immediately and the affected area washed. 
Tyres age due to exposure to sunlight and ozone this causes small radial cracks in the surface of the sidewalls, which are also referred to as weathering cracks, and are acceptable unless the cords are exposed. Another indication of ageing is black carbon dust coming from the tyre. 
If a tyre bursts from a puncture, the load of that tyre is then carried by the remaining tyres on that axle or bogey. That increases the stresses on the remaining tyres, increasing the risk of them failing. 
One of the more spectacular failings on a tyre is a tread separation. As the name suggests, the thick pad of rubber, which was bonded on to the casing in manufacture by the process of vulcanisation, fails and comes away from the carcass. 


The flying debris from the separation can damage not only other tyres but also other parts of the airframe, especially if the failure is at high speed, when a failure is more likely anyway. A pilot will inspect the tyres for the above damage during the pre-flight walkaround 
This photograph shows a Boeing 737 tyre that failed due to sidewall fatigue which was not detected when it was retreaded. 
Wheels and Tyres  
Tyre Pressures  
The tyre pressures used on aircraft can be divided into two  
groups. High-pressure tyres have pressures between 200 and  
315 PSI. Low-pressure tyres have pressures up to 200 PSI.  
Modern transport aircraft use high pressure tyres.  
The manufacturer's tyre pressure that is marked on the side of the  
tyre is the unloaded bench pressure for the tyre. On fitment to the  
aircraft this pressure must be increased by 4% to allow for tyre  
deflection. Tyre pressures should be checked and adjusted only  
when the tyres are at ambient temperature.  
As the tyres are not completely gas tight a loss of pressure of up to  
5% can be expected over a 24 hour period.  
If, on a pre-flight check, the tyres are found to have lost between  
0% and 5% they are topped up to the correct pressure. If they are  
down between 5% and 10% then they are topped up and a record  
is made in the tech log for a further check when the tyres are cold. Should the same tyre be found to be down again it is rejected.  High pressure tyres allow faster landing speeds  
If a tyre is found deflated it is replaced, if it was on a bogie then its  If a tyre on a bogie is replaced its axle partner is replaced as well  
axle partner is replaced as well. If two or more tyres on a bogie  
are deflated then all the tyres are replaced.  

Wheels and Tyres 
Aquaplaning or Hydroplaning 
Either of these terms can be used to refer to a condition where the tyre's tread is unable to clear all the surface water from under the wheel. Water is then pushed ahead of the tyre and forms a wedge that lifts the tyre off the runway. This results in a loss of braking and directional control. The tyre can become scalded and blister as friction causes the water to heat up and eventually boil as it is pushed along the runway.The speed at which aquaplaning occurs on a rotating wheel can be calculated using the formula 
9. (tyre pressure in PSI)= The speed of aquaplaning in KT 
The aquaplaning speed on a non-rotating wheel is less 
7 .7. (tyre pressure in PSI)= The speed of aquaplaning in KT 
From these formulae it can be seen that the higher the tyre pressure the higher the speed for the onset of aquaplaning. This can become a limiting factor when working out take off and landing speeds. Beware that these formula only apply to one form of aquaplaning, and there are several. Reverted rubber aquaplaning can occur at very low speeds.The use of the anti-skid system will help to prevent the wheel from aquaplaning by releasing brake pressure and allowing the wheel to speed up and clear the water from under the tyre. 


The aquaplaning speed on a rotating wheel is 9.p in PSI 
Wheels and Tyres 
Fusible Plugs 
Heavy braking of the aircraft can generate excessive heat that could cause the pressure in a tyre to increase to such a level it could explode. In a tubeless tyre a fusible or thermal plug is used as a means of deflating an overheated and therefore over pressurised tyre before this can happen. 
The plugs are fitted into the wheel rims and have an insert that is designed to melt at a certain temperature. When these melt they allow the tyre to deflate relatively quickly but not explosively. The tyre and wheel would then have to be replaced but additional damage from an exploding tyre would be avoided. 
A further safety enhancement is that the nitrogen venting from the plug will normally eject on the same side as the brake disc, where it will help prevent a brake fire. 


Blown thermal plugs will deflate the tyre within seconds 



Lesson 70 
Pneumatic Systems 

AGKlO 
Pneumatic Systems 
Pneumatic Systems 
Air driven or pneumatic systems are all systems driven by air or compressed gas. Pneumatic systems operate much like hydraulic systems and will employ controlling valves, filters and selector valves. They fall into four main categories. The first category contains systems that are driven by a constant supply of compressed air, usually derived from engine driven compressor pumps or from gas turbine engine compressor bleeds. Into this category fall: 
• 
Air conditioning 

• 
Pressurisation 

• 
Instruments 

• 
Hot air anti-icing 

• 
De-icing boots 

• 
Operation of secondary flight controls 

• 
Control ofjet pipe nozzles 

• 
Control of thrust reverser systems 

• 
Door seals 

• 
Air starting systems 

• 
Pressurised hydraulic reservoir 

• 
Air driven hydraulic pumps 


ft.ihtrl o 

On some installations the constant supply of air is used to replenish storage tanks which can then be used for emergency back up of a system. 
The second category contains systems that use bottled nitrogen or some other relatively inert gas as their main operating mechanism. 
Into this category fall: 
¦ 
Fire extinguishers 

¦ 
Life jackets 

¦ 
Slide rafts 



The third category contains systems that use bottled nitrogen or similar to provide a 'one-shot' back up when all other systems have failed. Systems that use pneumatics as a last resort are: 
¦ 
Undercarriage 'down' selection 

¦ 
Wheel brakes 



The final category is vacuum pumps. Some older piston engine aircraft use small vacuum pumps to provide a vacuum for gyroscopic instruments. 
Certain pneumatic systems use the air once, then dump it overboard. These are called total loss systems . 
Pneumatic Systems 
The Advantages of Pneumatic Systems 
The principle advantage of pneumatic systems is that air is readily available. Piston engines can be used to drive air compressors and gas turbine engines always have a ready supply of clean pressurised air for use. One subsidiary advantage is that, although air supports combustion, an air-driven system presents much less of a fire risk than a hydraulic system and can be used in high temperature areas. Another is that, because gas is compressible, pressurised gas can be used as a shock absorber. A third is that compressed gas occupies a relatively small volume at minimal mass and yet can expand to fill a large area. 
ft+i.+l o 

The Disadvantages of Pneumatic Systems 
Pneumatic systems have three main disadvantages: 
¦ 
Because gas is compressible it is not usable in systems that require precise and rapid responses like flying controls. 

¦ 
Because gas is much less viscous than fluid it is very difficult to seal high pressure pneumatic components. 

¦ 
Because gas is colourless and odourless, leaks in pneumatic systems are difficult and time consuming to trace. 


Pneumatic Systems 
Gas Turbine Engine Bleed Air Supplies 
The most common source of a constant air supply is engine bleed air from the compressor of gas turbine engine, either a turbojet or a turboprop. Engine bleed air is regarded as being at a comparatively low pressure and being available in high volume. 
The control valves, called engine bleed isolation/shut off valves, can be selected by the crew in normal operation and are closed automatically when the appropriate engine fire handle is pulled. Taking bleed air from the engines reduces mass flow through the engine, and therefore the thrust, so engine bleeds are often selected off for take-off. 
Pressure regulating valves, along with temperature and pressure sensors, protect both the aircraft systems and the persons on board from over-temperature or over-pressure events. 
On modern large gas turbines air may be bled from the IP and HP compressors. On leaving the engine bleed valves the IP and HP air may be mixed to regulate pressure by a pressure regulating valve. It may also pass through a heat exchanger where it is cooled by fan air. From there it is ducted into a gallery of pipes known as the bleed air manifold where there are temperature and pressure sensors to provide feedback to the control system. From there on, further isolation/control valves control its delivery to the various services. 
ft+IH+lo 
Bleed air supply from high pressure compressor 


Pneumatic Systems 
Gas Turbine Engine Bleed Air Supplies continued 
Bleed air is not only available from the main engines but may also be supplied by the Auxiliary Power Unit (APU), either in the air or on the ground. It is not unusual to use an electrical starter motor to start the APU then use engine bleed air from the APU to start the other engines. 
While they are on the ground, aircraft can be supplied from ground sources via ground pneumatic connections. 
--Bleed air manifold 
Wing anti-icing valves 
( 
Engine bleed air shut off valves 
APU bleed shut off valve 
Air turbine motor 
l 
i
Ground pneumatic connection 
Empennage anti-icing valves 
Pneumatic Systems 
Compressor Air Supplies 
Some older turbine engine aircraft did not have sufficient bleed air available for the pneumatics, and in that case a dedicated compressor, usually centrifugal, was driven from the auxiliary gearbox on the engine. 
Piston engine aircraft need air for instrumentation, cabin heating and de-icing. Air may be supplied by a single cylinder air cooled compressor driven by the engine, either by belts or from the gearbox or use pressurised air from a turbocharger system. If the air is supplied by the supercharger, engine power will be reduced. A vacuum pump may be used to supply some older gyroscopic instruments. 
ft.iff+l o 

Which of the following statements is UNTRUE? 
• Bleed air may be supplied by an APU 
• Bleed air may be taken from the HP compressor of a gas turbine engine 
• Engine bleed air is considered to be high presssure 
• Use of engine bleed air reduces thrust 
Pneumatic Systems 
The most common applications of pneumatics are in pressurisation and air-conditioning. These will be considered in detail in the next section. The following systems may also use pneumatics: 
Emergency Brakes 
Compressed air is normally fed to the system via a shuttle valve and a control valve, which allows proportional pressure into the system, depending on the amount an emergency brake handle is turned. 
Fixed Fire Extinguisher Bottles 
On all modern transport aircraft, the engine and APU fire extinguisher bottles are pressurised by nitrogen to deliver the extinguishant where it is required. The portable fire extinguishers are pressurised with various mediums depending on their use. 
Emergency Undercarriage Blow Down. 
Some aircraft use pneumatics for the emergency backup for undercarriage extension in case of total hydraulic failure. To reduce the risk of fire the system is normally pressurised with nitrogen, as it is an inert gas which will not react with hydraulic fluid. The pressures in these systems are normally high, in the vicinity of 3000 PSI, as the air is required to do the work normally done by powerful hydraulic pumps. 
ft+M+lo 
Normaldown operation Normal up operation 

UP positfon 
Undercarriage selector valve 
UndercarriageDOWN position selector valve 
Hydraulic fluid 
Emergency down operation 

Emergency DOWN selector valve open 

The illustration above shows normal extension and retraction on 
the first two images and emergency extension is shown on the 
final image 
Pneumatic Systems 
Carbon Dioxide 
Life vests and life rafts, are normally inflated by individual, self-contained, CO2 bottles. 
Anti-icing and De-icing Systems 
Hot air is used in jet engine intakes and to provide ice protection in the leading edges of the wings and empennage ofjet aircraft. Bleed air is also used in turboprops to inflate de-icing boots on the leading edges. 
Hydraulic Systems 
Hydraulic systems usually contain a pneumatic accumulator containing nitrogen charged to approximately half of system pressure. The accumulator damps out fluid pressure fluctuations in the system and maintains system pressure so that it is instantly available when a service is selected. 
ft+H+lo 

Oleo Legs 
Pneumatics are used, together with oil, to absorb shocks in undercarriage systems on landing. 
Door Seals 
Low pressure air can be used to inflate rubber door and hatch seals to make the cabin airtight for pressurisation. This is rare on modern aircraft. 
Air Starters 
Whilst small turbine engines can use electrical starter motors, most large gas turbine engines are started by directing bleed air, which is obtained from the APU, a ground air supply or, from an engine that is already running, on to the turbine air driven starter motor. 
This starter motor is similar to the motor illustrated on the next page, the air turbine motor. 
Pneumatic Systems 
ft.f:h+lo 
Air Turbine Motors 
Drive gearElectrical output
Air Turbine Motors (ATMs) are small turbines driven by engine bleed air. 
On some older aircraft they are used to drive hydraulic pumps that can back up the main system. On modern aircraftATMs sometimes drive constant frequency AC generators. 

Pneumatic Systems 
ft+M+lo 
Jet Pipe Nozzle Control 
Pneumatics are used in military aircraft to control the position of after-burner nozzles. The use of air in this area removes any fire risk that would be present if hydraulic fluid, or oil, were to be used. 
Thrust Reverser Control 
Thrust reversers that operate in hot stream air can use pneumatics as a control mechanism. The advantage is, as before, the reduced fire risk. Pneumatic rams or air driven motors drive the thrust reversal doors to their selected positions. 



Pneumatic Systems 
FCOM Scematic diagrams 
In your exam you may be expected to interpret a schematic diagram such as that shown opposite, which is extracted from an Airbus FCOM. Note, it is common FCOM practice to use electronic gate symbols such as the OR gates shown in this diagram. They don't always have the name ofthe gate (OR, AND, NOT etc) shown in text so you need to know the symbology. 
It is interesting that in this system only the HP air is regulated, the LP air is free to move through the NRV provided it is at a higher pressure than the downstream air. 
Note also how the fan air through the heat exchanger is regulated to control the temperature. 

OVBO 
PNEUMATIC CLOSER CONTROL 
+--" 
,-----REVERSE FLOW 
OIPRESS 
ELECTRICAL CLOSURE CONTROL

MANAGEMENT COMPUTER 1 
L.:::::==~ ENG1 
ENG 1 BLEED 
------------<~ 

FAN AIR VALVE BLEED ENG 1 STARTERVALVE 
NOT CLOSED APU BLEEDVALVE OPENING 
OVERPRESSURE 
OVERHEAT 
LEAK DETECTION 

Pneumatic Systems 
FCOM Scematic diagrams 
It's worth noting the inputs that can close the bleed valve: 
Selected closed 
Reverse flow 
No1 starter not closed i.e. failed to close after start 
APU valve opening 
Overpressure 
Overheat 
Leak detection 
No1 fire push button 


1111111111 =-­
OVBO PNEUMATIC CLOSER CONTROL ,-----REVERSE FLOW ELECTRICAL CLOSURE CONTROL 
ENG 1 STARTER 
+--" 
OIPRESS 
ENG 1 STARTER VALVE NOT CLOSED 

APU BLEEDVALVE OPENING 
OVERPRESSURE 
FAN AIR 
VALVE 
OVERHEAT 
LEAK DETECTION 
BLEED 
MANAGEMENT COMPUTER 1 
L.:::::==~ ENG1 
ENG 1 BLEED 
------------<~ 
Pneumatic Systems 
Cockpit Controls, Indications and System Failures 
The pneumatic system is remotely controlled from the cockpit by the operation of shut off and selector valves to the various services. System indications may include pressure and temperature gauges. 
High pressures and temperatures can cause failure of the ducting and possible damage to the surrounding airframe and engine structures, whereas low pressure could be an indication of a supply malfunction, or a leak in the system. Overheat sensors are normally located by the bleed air take off points and within the ducting, providing alerting indications to the flight deck. 
Depending on the fault and its location the impact on the flight may be small or serious. For example, isolating one wing because of a leak could prohibit flight through icing because wing leading edge anti-icing is lost. The X-bleed valve protects pressurisation to some extent, but it may reduce the altitude you can attain and therefore restrict flight range. 



Lesson 77 
Cabin Heating and Cooling Systems 

AGK 77 

Cabin Heating and Cooling Systems 
ft.ihil o 
Introduction 
This section looks at how cabin temperature is regulated. 'Conditioned air' is defined as air that has been controlled in respect to ventilation, temperature, and pressure. Humidity is generally limited but not controlled. In this lesson we'll examine temperature control. 
The Need for Temperature Control 
The outside air temperature at height can be very low, often below -60°C, whereas the temperature on the ground can be very high, as much as +45° in some parts of the world. The aircraft temperature control systems need to be able to cope with such large extremes and still maintain a comfortable cabin temperature. 
Light Aircraft Temperature Control 
Light aircraft temperature control systems are essentially heaters. There is no air conditioning in high temperatures you just open the window. 

The Need for Pressure Regulation 
The atmosphere is made up of 21 % Oxygen, 78% Nitrogen and 1 % other gases. The percentages of these gases remain constant throughout the lower atmosphere but, as altitude increases, their density, pressure and temperature decrease. 
At altitudes above approximately 10 000 ft there is insufficient air pressure to allow the gaseous exchange across the alveoli in the lungs. This can lead to hypoxia and its associated problems of loss of mental ability, loss of consciousness and possible death. Pressurising the cabin of the aircraft overcomes these problems and allows us to breathe normally at altitude without having to wear oxygen masks. 
Pressurisation is achieved by ducting engine bleed air into the cabin and controlling the rate at which it is let out. 
Cabin Heating and Cooling Systems 
ftiihi·lo 
Large Aircraft Temperature Control 
Temperature control on large aircraft, particularly jets and turboprops, is achieved by taking hot bleed air from the engines and splitting the supply into two. One part is cooled and is then re­mixed with the hot air to obtain the correct temperature. The hot air can be added at different locations on the aircraft to give varying temperatures. This is called hot trim air. The temperature-controlled air is also used to pressurise the aircraft, if pressurisation is required. 
The engine bleed air is called 'charge air'. 
The devices that deliver conditioned air are called air conditioning packs. There will be two or three packs on a transport aircraft depending on its size. 


This is the air conditioning system from an Airbus A340 showing the heat exchangers on the left, air cycle machine, condenser, re­heater and water extractor. Out of view to the right are the ozone converter and the pack valve. 
Cabin Heating and Cooling Systems 
ft+IFf·io 

Air Cooling Systems Pressurisation systems are required because: 
Air can be cooled by: 
¦  Passing warm air over a cooler surface, a heat exchanger ­heat exchangers are most efficient when there is a large temperature difference between the hot and cold sides.  
•  Making it do work. The more work done, the more cooling that takes place.  
•  Allowing the air to expand -the more expansion the more cooling.  

Air conditioning packs use some or all of the three cooling methods in different proportions. They are either air cycle or vapour cycle systems. The system on which the examinations are based is the bootstrap or turbo compressor system. 
Air is cooled by passing it over a cold surface, making it do work or allowing it to expand. 

• At altitudes above approximately 10 000 ft there is insufficient air pressure to force the oxygen required into 
our lungs to allow us to breathe normally 
• The percentage of oxygen in the air at altitudes above approximately 10 000 ft is too low 
• At altitudes above approximately 10 000 ft the air density is insufficient to force the oxygen required into our lungs 
to allow us to breathe normally 
• There is insufficient oxygen present at altitudes above approximately 10 000 ft 
Cabin Heating and Cooling Systems 
Bootstrap Systems 

The bootstrap system can be used with either a mechanical blower or a turbine engine. It is an air cycle system which relies on compression, expansion and work done by the air itself to reduce the temperature ofthe charge air. 
The core of the bootstrap system is a compressor driven by a turbine which, in turn, is driven by the charge air. The cooling is by heat exchange with ram air and by making the charge air do work across a compressor and turbine assembly. The compressor and turbine assembly is used in the other air cycle systems and is referred to as a "cold air unit' or an "air cycle machine". 


Cabin Heating and Cooling Systems 
ft+ifff·io 
Function and Operation 
The Flow Control Valve reacts to the charge air density to ensure the correct mass of air enters the system. 
The bypass valves are also referred to as, and effectively are, temperature control valves. They are connected to temperature sensors either in the cabin or in the outlet duct leading to the cabin, and react automatically to maintain the selected temperature by splitting and mixing hot and cold air. 


Bypass valves control cabin temperature 

Cabin Heating and Cooling Systems 
ft+Milo 
Function and Operation continued 
The air entering the cooling unit of the system passes through the primary heat exchanger (also referred to as a pre-cooler) where, in the cruise, it gives up temperature to ram ambient air without effective loss of pressure. On the ground and during slow flight the cooling flow is provided by pack fans. These fans can be electrically driven or driven via gears from the GAU. 
The stream of cooler air from the primary heat exchanger enters a second bypass valve where it is mixed with a little of the charge air that bypassed the pre-cooler. The output ofthe second bypass valve is directed into the eye of the centrifugal compressor of the Cold Air Unit (GAU). 


The primary heat exchanger cools the air 
A second bypass valve opens to allow some air to bypass the second cooling stage 

Cabin Heating and Cooling Systems 
ft.Hf·llo 
Function and Operation continued 
The CAU consists of a centrifugal compressor driven by a turbine. The compressor pressurises the air, and so heats it. It then passes over a secondary heat exchanger or intercooler and is directed onto the edge ofthe turbine. The intercooler produces a large drop in charge air temperature but only reduces the charge pressure slightly. 
As the air passes through the turbine it loses energy in two ways, firstly by doing work to rotate the turbine which, in turn, has to drive the compressor and secondly as it expands across the turbine. As it leaves the turbine the air pressure has been reduced again and the temperatures will be very low, close to freezing. The major part of the cooling, however, took place across the secondary heat exchanger. 
The air flowing from the cold air unit can be below the dew point, so an ice screen is fitted to prevent ice impacting in the water extractor. Alternative systems add some of the hot air to this flow to prevent any moisture freezing. 


Cabin Heating and Cooling Systems 
ft.f:ii/lo 
The Bootstrap 
The term 'bootstrap' is a shorthand expression for a device or system that starts and runs with no apparent external power supply used. The name comes from the American term to 'pull yourself up by your own bootstraps'. The bootstrap in this case is the turbo-compressor element, as the compressor is driven by the turbine rather than being driven by an external prime mover. 
Water Extractor 
A water separator is located in the outlet from the CAU. 
After passing through the turbine the air is still swirling and the heavier molecules of water are thrown to the outside by centrifugal action. The water extractor consists of a woollen sock over a metal frame. The water is soaked up by the sock and the air flows on through to the cabin. The water is dumped overboard through a drain. If the water extractor starts to freeze warm air can be directed on to the unit. 
The combination ofthe turbo-compressor and the water extractor reduce the relative humidity to something like 15% which allays corrosion caused by condensation. Very few aircraft control humidity it is normally limited rather than controlled. 


The bootstrap is the CAU and the intercooler 

Cabin Heating and Cooling Systems 
ft+Milo 
Plenum 
The streams of air at different temperatures are mixed in a plenum, or mixing chamber before entering the cabin. The air temperature in the plenum chamber will be higher than that required in the cabin because there will be a small, final cooling process as the air expands into the cabin. 
Temperature Control on the Ground 
Air and vapour cycle systems will work on the ground as long as they have a source of charge air. If the main engines are not running, one pack can be operated using bleed air from the Auxiliary Power Unit (APU). 
If the APU is not available, it may be possible to connect the aircraft to an external ground conditioning unit. The ground unit supplies conditioned air which is distributed throughout the aircraft by the aircraft systems air conditioning ducts. 
Temperature Control in Flight 
The desired cabin temperature is selected on the flight deck controller, and then the system will schedule cooled, ambient and/or 'hot trim' air as necessary to achieve the desired temperatures. You can see the hot trim air and the relevant trim valves shown in amber on the next page. 

Air Conditioning Ducts 
The air ducts are made from: 
¦ 
Stainless steel for use with high pressure or high temperature air. 

¦ 
Light alloy for use with intermediate pressure or temperature air. 

¦ 
Plastic or fibreglass for use with low pressure or temperature air. 



If the air pressure in the high-pressure duct drops an amber warning light will illuminate, as this can indicate a burst duct. 
System Protection 
A shut off valve (isolation valve) isolates the air conditioning system from the engine in the event of contamination or fire. To ensure that the conditioned air is not delivered to the aircraft at excessive pressures or temperatures, a pressure reducing valve and temperature thermostat are fitted in the inlet manifold to the air conditioning ducting. 
Cabin Heating and Cooling Systems 
Cargo Compartments 
On most modern transport aircraft, the cargo compartments are also conditioned. This allows for the carriage of pets and livestock. However, the cargo compartments are supplied through separate isolation valves so they can be turned off. This means they lose conditioned air supply and so will become very cold. Nevertheless, they will remain pressurised. 
Recirculation Systems 
In modern aircraft recirculation fans fitted within the cabin and driven by AC electric motors force the conditioned air to flow back through the aircraft before it is exhausted to atmosphere. This helps to reduce the load on the air conditioning packs and also reduces the need to take so much bleed air from the engines, so saves fuel. 
Pressure and mass flow controller 
Ground connection 
Cabin ambient air Outflow vale 
Recirculating systems save fuel and reduce costs 



Lesson 72 
Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
AGK 72 
Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
Pressurisation Systems 
An aircraft that flies at high altitude reduces its fuel consumption for a given air speed and avoids bad weather. However, while the percentage of oxygen remains constant at 21 %, any increase in altitude results in a drop in pressure. This in turn affects the amount of oxygen absorbed when breathing in. Lack of oxygen affects thought processes and the degree of consciousness ­hypoxia. 
Hypoxia is avoided by pressurising the cabin. Rather than expressing cabin pressure in Pascals or hPa we find it more useful to use the term cabin altitude. 
Pressurisation is achieved by feeding conditioned air into the cabin through the air conditioning packs and restricting its flow out. The pressure is controlled by a large valve fitted in the outside skin of the pressure hull called the outflow or discharge valve. The valves are often duplicated for safety. 
ft.ihi·-l o 
liy 

Restricted flow of conditioned air to atmosphere 
Pressurisation avoids hypoxia The cabin is pressurised by restricting the outflow 
Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
ft+i.i+lo 
Maximum Operating Altitude 
The maximum operating altitude of an aircraft is not entirely or solely related to pressurisation systems, but the EASA Learning Objectives mention it in the section on pressurisation, so we will touch upon it here. 
There are three main factors that determine the limit. 
The first is the maximum certified altitude as listed in the Aircraft Flight Manual -this is a structural limitation, defined by the pressurisation loads on the fuselage. 
Thrust limited altitude is determined by quite literally having sufficient thrust for manoeuvre and climb. 
Buffet limited altitude is that at which a 1.3g loading from turning, manoeuvring or turbulence may be safely flown without experiencing low speed stall or Mach buffet. 
The maximum operating altitude will be the lowest of any one of those three factors. 


Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
Differential Pressure 
As the pressure in the cabin increases the difference between the cabin pressure and the ambient pressure will increase. This difference is called the differential pressure. The maximum differential pressure for a transport aircraft is a structural limit and usually between 7 and 9 psi. 
This graph shows aircraft altitude against cabin altitude and can be used to find the differential pressure. It can also be used to find the maximum altitude at which an aircraft can fly at given a cabin altitude and differential. 
ft+IH~fo 
0 0 
~ 
a, "C 
.a 
~ 
Q) C: 
-a_ 
~ 
Q) 
< 

Cabin Altitude ft x 1000 
The max differential pressure will be between 7 and 9 psi 
Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
Differential Pressure -example 1 
The following example explains use of the graph. 
Example: 
Find the aircraft maximum altitude while maintaining a cabin altitude of 6000 ft and a differential of 4 psi. 
Solution: 
Locate the 6000 ft mark on the bottom axis ofthe graph. Trace a line vertically upward until it intersects the diagonal 4 psi differential line. Trace a horizontal across from the point of intersection to the vertical axis and read off the altitude, 17 000 ft. 
Similar questions can be asked based on tabular information. In­service defects like a crack in a window may impose a reduced differential pressure. The next example demonstrates how to use the tables. 
35  
30  
0  
0  
~  25  
a, "C  20  
.a  
~  15  
Q)  
C:  
-a_  10  
~  
Q) <  5  
5  10  15  
Cabin Altitude ft x 1000  

Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
ft+++~,­
Differential Pressure -example 2 
Example: 
Because of a crack in the windscreen the maximum differential pressure for an aircraft is restricted to 7 psi. If a cabin altitude of 4000 ft is to be maintained use the table to determine the maximum operating altitude. 
Solution: 
This is a standard atmosphere table. The only columns we are interested in are the first column, height, and the third column headed lb/in2. 4000 ft can be seen to equate to 
12.691 psi. If the maximum differential pressure is to be 7 psi then the greatest altitude will be the one where the pressure is 12.691 -7 = 5.691. This is 24 000 ft. 
The method can of course be worked in reverse to find the maximum cabin altitude given an aircraft altitude and differential pressure, or to find the differential pressure given the cabin and aircraft altitude. 

ft  millibars  In hg  lb/in2  oc  
4000  875.10  25.842  12.691  7.075  
5000  843.07  24.896  12.226  5.094  
6000  811.99  23.978  11.775  3.113  
7000  781.85  23.088  11.338  1.132  
8000  752.62  22.225  10.913  -0.850  
9000  724.28  21.388  10.502  -2.831  
10 000  696.81  20.577  10.104  -4.812  
11 000  670.20  19.791  9.718  -6.793  
12 000  644.41  10.029  0.344  -8.774  
13 000  691.43  18.292  8.891  -10.756  
14 000  595.24  17.577  8.630  -12.737  
15 000  571.82  16.886  8.291  -14.718  
16 000  549.15  16.216  7.962  -16.699  
17 000  527.22  15.569  7.569  -18.680  
18 000  506.00  14.942  7.335  -20.662  
19 000  485.47  14.336  7.038  -22.643  
20 000  465.63  13.750  6.750  -24.624  
21 000  446.45  13.184  6.472  -26.605  
22 000  427.91  12.636  6.203  -28.686  
23 000  410.00  12.107  5.943  -30.568  
24 000  392.71  11 .597  5.692  -32.549  
25 000  376.01  11 .104  5.450  -34.530  
26 000  359.89  10.628  5.216  -36.511  
27 000  344.33  10.168  4.991  -38.492  
28 000  329.32  9.725  4.773  -40.474  
29 000  314.85  9.298  4.563  -42.455  
30 000  300.89  8.885  4.361  -44.436  

ft  millibars  In hg  lb/in2  oc  
-1000  1050.41  31.019  15.234  +16.981  
0  1013.25  29.921  14.696  15.000  
1000  977.17  28.856  14.172  13.019  
2000  942.13  27.821  13.664  11 .038  
3000  908.12  26.817  13.170  9.056  


Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
~ysrem uperauon m r-11gm Climb 
During the climb the ambient pressure around the aircraft decreases and the cabin ambient pressure must also decrease. If the cabin goes up more slowly the aircraft will slowly pressurise. If the cabin is to climb then, in this phase of flight, the outflow valves allow more air out of the cabin than comes in. If operated correctly the cabin should arrive at its cruise altitude at the same time as the aircraft arrives it cruise altitude. 
This diagram shows the cabin rate of climb compared to the aircraft rate of climb for a well managed climb. The cabin has arrived at 8000 ft just as the aircraft arrives at its cruise altitude of 36 000 ft. 
A calculation can be made to establish the cabin rate of climb required to match the maximum aircraft rate of climb. 
Example: 
An aircraft takes 26 minutes to climb from an airfield at 2000 ft to a cruise level of 31 000 ft. What cabin rate of climb would raise the cabin altitude to 8000 ft in that period? 
Solution: 
The cabin has to go from 2000 ft to 8000 ft in 26 minutes. This needs a cabin rate of climb of 6000 7 26 = 231 ft/min 
ft.Mf+lo 
36 000 33 000 
30 000 27 000
-
J 24 000 ·;;; C: 21 000 ] 18 000 
:.:; 
9000 
8000 6000 
rmo
cabin rate ot c , 
3000 
0 4 8 Time in minutes 
When the cabin is climbing more air is let out than air in 
12 16 
Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
Cruise 
When the cabin altitude pressure (Zc) is at its selected cruise value the rate of discharge from the discharge valve decreases to equal the inflow from the mass flow controller. A constant pressure will be maintained in the cabin. This is called the isobaric range. 
This diagram shows a typical flight profile with the aircraft altitude in red and the cabin altitude in green. The cabin is raised to a fixed altitude of 8000 ft and minor variations in aircraft altitude are absorbed, the maximum differential pressure never being exceeded. 
Descent 
If the cabin discharge valve is moved towards the closed position the cabin pressure will increase, so the cabin altitude will decrease. The cabin altitude is descending and the aircraft is de­pressurising. Depending on the type of controller the aircraft will either be fully de-pressurised 500-1000 ft above the airfield or just after touch down. 

30 000 ft/ 4.36 PSI
30 
---Minor 
e-25 
0 0 0 
..-20 ..!!. 
Cl.) 
-15 ·= ~ 10
Cl.) 
'O 
<( ~ 5 

Time in minutes 
To maintain cabin height the same amount of air is let out as in 
The normal cabin altitude is 8000 ft 
To descend the cabin less air is let out than is let in 
Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
The Pressure Hull and System Components 
Air transport aircraft fuselages are designed and built as a pressure hull. The pressure hull encloses the flight deck, passenger cabin and cargo holds. It does not include the undercarriage bays. All pipes, cables and control runs that pass through the skin of a pressure hull have to be sealed against leakage of air. 
All external doors and hatches that give access into the pressure hull are also sealed. Most modern cabin doors are the plug type that, on opening, first move into the cabin. If any door or hatch is not properly closed and locked the flight crew is alerted by an amber light and also, in some cases, by an audible warning. 
ft.i=hf+lo 
Safety valves 
,;._~~=::::S'.::'_f__J_91owout valve 

, ~--~.......--control runs, 
Air ground logic 



ducts, pipes & 
Hold wiring looms Dischargevalve 
The pressure hull does not include the undercarraige bays 
Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
Outflow/Discharge Valves 
The outflow or discharge valves are electro-pneumatically operated. During normal operation the valves are automatically controlled by a flight deck pressure controller. The controller directs pneumatics to open or close the valves to maintain the selected cabin altitude, Zc, or the selected rate of climb or descent of the cabin, Vzc. 
Failure of automatic control requires the valves to be positioned manually by the crew. During manual operation the valves are operated by electric motors. 
Manual operation during climb and descent is time consuming. During the cruise the system stabilises requiring little effort. 
During flight the valves move between fully open and fully closed to control the pressure. 
Dump Valves 
Dump valves may be fitted to enable a rapid rate of reduction in cabin pressure when needed. An emergency descent may necessitate a faster than normal reduction, for example. Or it may be used to help clear smoke from a cabin fire. Dump valves are normally electrically operated, and may also be linked to a weight on wheels (WOW) switch to ensure that the cabin is completely depressurised on the ground. 
ft+M+lo 



operated pet control valve valve Cabin 
Bellows 

Ambient sensing port Ambient air 
The outflow valve can be called the discharge valve 
The outflow valves are partly open in the cruise 
If the differential pressure exceeds the maximum by 0.5 psi the normal control system has failed and the safety valves have operated 
Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
Safety Valves 
Aircraft are fitted with two safety valves to protect the fuselage structure from over pressurisation in the event offailure of the normal control system. If the cabin pressure exceeds the max differential by 0.5 psi the safety valves open and control the cabin at this higher pressure differential. Safety valves may also be referred to as excessive differential pressure relief valves. 
Inward Relief Valves 
Inward relief valves limit negative differential pressure in an emergency descent 
Aircraft structures are not designed to withstand negative differential pressure, where the ambient pressure is greater than the cabin pressure. To prevent this happening, inward relief valves or negative pressure relief valves are fitted which open at a negative differential of 0.5 psi. 
Inward relief valves limit negative differential pressure in an emergency descent 

Blow Out Bungs 
To prevent the cabin floor from collapsing due to a differential pressure occurring between the cabin and cargo holds, plastic blow out bungs are fitted in the cabin floor over the length of the cargo bay. In the event of a decompression in either the cabin or the cargo bay the bungs will be blown out allowing the pressures to equalise. The bungs are also known as pressure equalising panels. 
Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
Cabin Pressure Control Systems 
There are two types of cabin pressure controllers pneumatic on older aircraft and electronic on more modern aeroplanes. 
All pressure controllers have sensing elements that receive inputs of cabin pressure, rate of change of cabin pressure and atmospheric pressure. They can operate in either automatic or manual mode. The normal mode ofoperation is AUTO the manual mode is only usually used ifthere is a system failure. 
A cabin pressure controller operating in AUTO will regulate cabin altitude, cabin altitude rate-of-change and differential pressure. 
ft+iitii=fo 

Pneumatic Controller 
On the older pneumatic systems the cabin altitude and rate of change of cabin pressure is manually selected on the controller by varying the load on pressure sensors which then controls the operation of the outflow/discharge valves automatically. Indications of the selections are displayed on gauges in the cockpit. 
The pneumatic controller uses air pressure to control the position of the discharge valve, thus controlling the rate of outflow from the cabin. In the event of failure of the controller the pilots can assume manual control of the outflow or discharge valve. 
Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
Flight Deck Indications 
The control and monitoring of the pressurisation and air conditioning system is normally carried out from one dedicated panel. A typical pneumatic control panel and combined cabin VS I/differential pressure/cabin altitude gauge called the triple gauge are shown in this diagram, both from a BAe146. 
The pressurisation control panel controls the discharge valves in both automatic and manual operating modes. The operating mode is selected by a push-button MODE switch and is normally set to AUTO. 
In the automatic mode the desired cabin altitude and flight altitude, the barometric correction, and the desired rate of climb and descent are set using the knobs at the bottom of the panel. The AUTO dial reflects the selected altitudes and the barometric correction which has been set. With AUTO selected the discharge valves automatically open and close to maintain the selected rate of climb to the selected cabin height. There is automatic over and under pressure protection. 


Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
Flight Deck Indications continued 
The associated triple gauge shows the actual rate of change of cabin altitude, the differential pressure and the cabin altitude. 
If MAN is selected on the mode switch automatic control ceases and the MAN rotary control above the MODE switch becomes active. This is used to inch open and close the discharge valves to maintain the required cabin altitude, the discharge valve position being shown just above the rotary control. 
To the left of the discharge valve position indicators a second rotary switch operates in either AUTO or MAN to close individual discharge valves or, by selecting DITCH, to close them both. DITCH closes the outflow valve(s) to minimise water ingress following a landing on water. Automatic over and under pressurisation protection is also available in manual mode. 
Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
Electronic Controllers 
Electronic control allows automatic control of the system in normal operation. 
There are two sources of electrical power that can operate the outflow valve, AC power for normal operation and DC power as a backup. This dual power source means a separate dump valve is not required. 
This diagram shows a typical modern control panel, actually from a B737. 
The departure airfield altitude is set in the window marked LAND ALT before take-off. With the FLT/GRD switch set to GRD the outflow valves are full open and the cabin is unpressurised. When the switch is selected to FLT before take off the outflow valves move towards close, slightly pressurising the cabin to improve passenger comfort and to prevent any surge in pressure. Ifthe take-off is conducted with the packs off they are selected on as the aircraft climbs through 500 ft or at the first power change. 
Having been set with the flight level and cabin altitude required, the controller acts in AUTO as a pressure controller deciding the rate of cabin climb and descent as it accesses the flight profile from the air data computer. 
CAB . 3 3 814192/93i94losos\5606 4681/6 80 FLT 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 
ALTITUDE X 1000 FEET -MAX PRESS SCHEDULE (7 8 PSI) 
Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
Electronic Controllers 
During the climb the controller will bring the cabin up to its selected altitude. This can be faster than the 500fpm, but at no time must this exceed the maximum rate of 1800 ft/min. 
About 1000 ft before the cabin reaches its set altitude a cruise relay trips and the controller acts as an isobaric controller unless the maximum differential is exceeded when the controller acts as the max differential controller. 
For descent the cruise relay trips out and a descent relay trips in to schedule the descent to the selected LAND ALT. The controller programs the cabin to land at a slightly higher pressure than ambient so the aircraft lands pressurised. On touch down the ground logic switch tells the controller to start depressurising the aircraft when the FLT/GRD switch is selected to GRD. 
CAB . 3 3 814192/93i94losos\5606 4681/6 80 FLT 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 
ALTITUDE X 1000 FEET -MAX PRESS SCHEDULE (7 8 PSI) 
This aircraft lands pressurised 
Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
Electronic Controllers 
If the aeroplane begins to descend without tripping out the cruise relay an amber 'OFF SCH ED DESCENT' light illuminates. 
In the event of the automatic system failing the controller will illuminate an amberAUTO FAIL light and selection to standby is required this action illuminates a green STANDBY light and extinguishes the AUTO FAIL light. Alterations in cabin or flight altitudes now have to be input manually, cabin rate of climb or descent is controlled by the cabin rate selector. 
In the event of standby failure the controller is selected to manual. 
In manual the only control the crew has is over the position of the outflow valve. It can be either opened or closed to increase or decrease the cabin height. In manual the outflow valve will not automatically open to de-pressurise the aircraft on landing. This means the doors cannot be opened until the outflow valve is opened manually. 
A ram air inlet is used for emergency pressurisation in the event of the loss of conditioned air. 
CAB -3 3 814192/93i94losos1s66o64681/6 80 FLT 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 
ALTITUDE X 1000 FEET -MAX PRESS SCHEDULE (7 8 PSI) 
Under manual control the aircraft will not automatically de­pressurise on landing 
Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
Decompression 
There are three categories of decompression, normal (6 to 10 seconds), rapid (4 to 6 seconds) and explosive (0 to 3 seconds). The time quoted is the time it takes the cabin pressure to equalise with the outside pressure. 
An explosive decompression will be accompanied by dust and mist in the air, rushing air in the cabin and, obviously, a drop in pressure. The drop in pressure sucks up the dust the mist is formed by condensation as temperature and pressure drop. 
The aircraft systems will at: 
¦ 
10 000 ft cabin altitude, give the flight crew a visual and aural CABIN ALT warning -the warning altitude. 

¦ 
13 850 ft cabin altitude, illuminate the AUTO FAIL light on the control. 

¦ 
14 000 ft cabin altitude, automatically present the passengers oxygen masks in the half-hung position. 


The pilots must put on their oxygen masks, manually close the outflow valves and initiate an emergency descent. 

Definitions Cabin altitude: cabin pressure expressed as a altitude. 
Cabin vertical speed: change in cabin pressure expressed as rate of change of cabin altitude. Normally known as cabin rate of climb or descent. 
Differential pressure: the difference between cabin pressure and ambient pressure normally expressed in psi. 
Ground pressurisation: pressurising the cabin on the ground for testing purposes. This is normally a procedure performed by maintenance staff. 
Cabin Pressurisation Systems 
New developments 
New aircraft such as the B787 save fuel by bleeding very little air from the engines. Electrically driven blowers supply air for the air conditioning system which is becoming widely known as the environmental control system (ECS). Further savings occur through not having to waste energy cooling or decreasing the pressure as the electric motor rpm is adjusted to maintain the desired pressure and flow rate. 



Lesson 73 
Ice and Rain Protection 

AGK 73 
Ice and Rain Protection 
ft+1&11o 
Ice and Rain Protection Systems 

Any ice formation can be dangerous to aircraft as it will increase Not all aircraft require all of this protection. Only some aircraft the weight of the aircraft, increase the profile drag, reduce the lift have control surface protection, and some aircraft do not require by altering the wing profile, and reduce thrust if engine icing is tail protection. 
experienced. Areas of the aircraft where ice formation would adversely affect the handling of the aircraft are known as critical areas. 
Ice protection is necessary for: 
• 
Aerofoils 

• 
Tailplane and Fin 

• 
Intakes (Engine and APU) 

• 
Propellers 

• 
Control surfaces 

• 
Windscreens 

• 
Detector Probes (Pitot etc.) 

• 
Slats and leading edge flaps 

• 
Carburettors 

• 
Drain Masts 

• 
Waste water connections 


Ice and Rain Protection 
EASA Regulatory Requirements 
EASA regulations state that operators must establish procedures to be followed when ground de-icing and anti-icing and related inspections of the aircraft are necessary. It prohibits a take-off unless the external surfaces are clear of any deposits, which might adversely affect the performance and controllability of the aeroplane, except as permitted in the Aeroplane Flight Manual. Some manuals state that the aircraft can take-off with a degree of hoar frost on the underside of the wings. 
EASA regulations prohibit a pilot from starting a flight under known or expected icing conditions, unless the aeroplane is certificated and equipped to cope with such conditions. 
ft+ii1-lo 

In Flight Icing Conditions 
In flight icing conditions are categorised by the amount of ice that forms and the speed at which it forms into light, moderate and severe.Icing conditions are said to exist in flight if the TAT is below +10°c either with visible moisture in the air or if the visibility is below 1500 m. Ice detection systems will warn that icing conditions have been encountered. Many systems work better if they are selected on before icing is encountered. 
All ice and frost must be removed before flight unless the Flight Manual permits some to remain 
Ice and Rain Protection 
Types of Icing Frost or Hoar Frost 
Frost on the ground forms mainly at night as the heat radiates from the earth. In flight frost or hoar frost forms when a cold airframe descends through warm air. It is most persistent on cold soaked aircraft on the ground in conditions of high relative humidity. 
Runback Icing, +10 to -3°C 
This forms in flight when warmer rain hits a cold airframe. The aircraft's speed is sufficiently high to prevent it freezing on impact so the water runs back and freezes as a clear glaze. 
Glaze or Clear Ice, -3 to -S°C 
This forms all over the airframe as a clear glaze. Supercooled water droplets impact the surface, a small part freezes and releases latent heat, the remainder runs back and forms what is known in meteorology as clear ice. 
If supercooled water falls as rain it forms clear ice on the airframe in the same way as it does in flight. This is called freezing rain. 
ft+1I1-lo 

Rime Ice, below -S°C 
This is formed where supercooled rain droplets hit the airframe and freeze on impact trapping the air. It has a milky white granular appearance. 
Mixed Icing 
This forms as a combination of both rime and glaze ice making an opaque surface. This happens when the aircraft is at an intermediate temperature between the glaze and rime figures. 

Ice and Rain Protection 
Ice Detection 

Vibrating rod ice detector head
Ice detection systems only warn that icing has been encountered. The frequency of the warning will indicate the severity of the conditions. 
Vibrating Rod Systems 
The most modern system is the vibrating rod, which is mounted on the outside of the aircraft. The rod is vibrated at 40 KHz, and when ice forms on the rod, it slows down which illuminates the ice warning light and activates a heater within the rod. This melts the ice so the rod returns to its 40 KHz extinguishing the warning light until ice forms on it again. Ifthe light remains on constantly the ice detector is faulty. 
You may well see these types of detectors referred to in EASA exams as Rosemount Ice Detectors, as the company that makes the Rosemount air temperature probe also make ice detectors. 
Ice and Rain Protection 
ft+ii1-lo 
Pressure Operated Detectors 
A pressure operated detector uses an aerofoil cross section tube protruding into the airflow. Several small holes are let into the leading edge, there are fewer and smaller holes in the trailing edge. This forms a pitot static system in which the pitot (ram) air pressure holds a relay open. 
In icing conditions the holes on the leading edge ice up before those on the trailing edge. This causes the pitot air pressure to fall, allowing the static pressure to close the relay and give an icing warning. At the same time power is applied to the heater element causing it to heat and melt the ice, so the ram air pressure is re-established and the relay broken, de-activating the ice warning light. 


Ice and Rain Protection 
Serrated Rotor Systems 
The serrated rotor system uses an electric motor to turn a rotor that has grooves cut into it. The rotor turns next to a fixed knife. As ice forms on the rotor the knife cuts it off. Because the motor is flexibly mounted it moves under the torque reaction, which switches on the ice detection light. 

Fuselage 
Ice and Rain Protection 
Hot Rod Systems 
The hot rod or black rod is the oldest system, and only gives a visual indication that icing conditions exist. An aerofoil section rod is mounted below the pilot side screen angled back. The rod is painted black and contains a heater element. When ice forms on the rod the pilot can heat it removing the ice then observe and time how quickly it takes the ice to reform. A light that illuminates the rod allows the pilot to use the system at night. 

Ice Detection Lights 
Ice detection lights are mounted into the fuselage or wing leading edges, and illuminate the leading edge ofthe wings for visual inspection in flight. 
Ice and Rain Protection 

Airframe Anti-Icing and De-Icing 
Ice build-up can be dealt with either by anti-icing systems, which prevent ice accretion, or by de-icing systems which remove ice build-up from the airframe and engine intakes. Some systems do both. 
De-Icing Paste 
Light aircraft without any fixed method of removing ice as it forms can have de-icing paste applied to the leading edge of the wings, fins and tailplane before take-off. Although it is called de-icing paste, a better description would be anti-icing paste as it provides short term protection only, in case the pilot inadvertently enters icing conditions. 


Ice and Rain Protection 
ft+W+lo 
Thermal Systems 
Typical thermal anti-ice system
Thermal systems, as the name suggests, heat the area requiring 
ice protection. The heat is normally provided by electrically heated mats or hot bleed air. 
Modern jet aircraft use thermal anti-icing systems for the leading edge of the wings and tail. These use large quantities of hot bleed air to heat the inner surface of the leading edge. The air escapes through outflow holes under the wings or into the nacelles. 
Hot air systems require a shut off valve and temperature overheat sensor so that the system can be isolated in the event of excess temperature before structural damage is done. 
These systems will overheat without a flow of cooling air across the wings, so if selected on the ground, a time delay of 12 seconds will elapse after the wheels lift off before the system starts to operate. Because they rely on engine bleeds there is a performance penalty ifthey are used. 
Heated mats are occasionally used for airframe anti-icing but only on small areas and usually on light aircraft. 

Ice and Rain Protection 
Pneumatic System 
Piston engined and turbo-prop aircraft use pneumatic de-icing systems. Attached to the leading edge of the wings, fin and tailplane are rubber boots consisting of a series of separate tubes, which are inflated and deflated either on demand or according to an automatic cycle. 
The act of inflating the tubes cracks the ice, allowing the slipstream to carry it away. One has to be careful, however, that the boots are operated when the ice is between 0.5 and 1.5 cm thick. If operated before 0.5 cm the ice can form a shell around the inflated profile of the boots and render them useless. If operated after 1.5 cm the ice can be too strong to break off. 
The wing section controls the design of the boots, ifthe inflation tubes run around the leading edge they are described as chord wise, if they run along the leading edge they are described as span wise. Thick wing sections use chord wise tubes thin wing sections use span wise tubes. To ensure that there is static electrical bonding between the wing and the boot the outer layer is made from neoprene rubber. 
Ice and Rain Protection 
ft+ii&fto 
Pneumatic System 
If the boots are not being operated they have a vacuum pressure applied to suck them on to the wings. When selected on, the vacuum stops and a positive air pressure is applied to inflate the tubes. 
For light aircraft all the tubes inflate at the same time. For large aircraft the boots operate in sections, for example A, B, C. To maintain balance section A will inflate on both wings at the same time cracking the ice. They will then start to deflate with vacuum pressure as section B starts to inflate and so on until the cycle is complete. 
For light aircraft the pilot operates a push once switch as required. If there is a single cycle it typically takes 34 seconds. For larger aircraft there are two speed settings, fast for heavy icing and slow for light icing, shown below. 
Fast cycle Heavy icing 26 sec. interval Slow cycle Light icing 206 sec. interval 
The tubes are inflated to a pressure of 18 psi. At 8 psi a green light comes on and remains on to show the boots are inflated until the pressure drops again below 8 psi at which point it goes out. 


Ice and Rain Protection 
Fluid Systems 
The 'weeping wing' system uses isopropyl alcohol to de-ice the 
Horizontal stabilizer 
aircraft in flight. The fluid is pumped from a reservoir to porous metal strips inserted in the leading edges which sweat the fluid out across the skin breaking the hold ofthe ice, allowing the airflow to remove it. 
The pilot selects the quantity offluid to be used with a timer allowing a maximum application time of 8 minutes. A warning will 

Vent trap ~­be given when there is 30 minutes of fluid left in the tank. To 
Gallery pipe

ensure that fluid is pumped up to the higher strips a head Tank I l compensating valve is used. 
-a.~ •
Filler -~ Head compensation valve Filter Wing distribution panels Pump 
Ice and Rain Protection 

Engine Anti-Icing and De-Icing Jet Engine Intakes 
Nose cowl 
Jet engine air intakes are heated by a small amount of hot air passing through a sealed or perforated duct. Some manufacturers provide continuous anti-icing because the intake lip is an aerodynamic stagnation point some allow engine anti­icing to be selected on and off. 
Hot air anti-icing may also be provided for the inlet guide vanes. The first stage of the compressor may be protected by hot air from 
Nose cone 
the nacelle and guide vanes anti-icing systems being vented through the engine. 
The use of engine anti-icing reduces engine performance partly because the bleed air is taken off the side of the engine and partly because introducing warm air into the inlet reduces mass flow. Many manufacturers consider that the penalty is minimal and give no performance correction figures. 

Ice and Rain Protection 
Turbo-Prop Intakes 
Intakes of turbo prop aircraft are usually heated by electrical elements. The stagnation zone on the lip and 'breaker strips' on the external surface of the intake are provided with constant anti­icing. Other areas have intermittently heated elements to provide de-icing. 
Ice and Rain Protection 
Ice Diverters 
Some turbo-props have ice diverter ducts to allow ice broken off at the intake to exit harmlessly to atmosphere rather than being drawn into the engine. 
Many turboprops and some jets are designed with the engine oil tank in the intake casing. The hot oil just below the skin reduces intake icing. 

Ice and Rain Protection 
Propeller Anti-Icing and De-Icing 
Electrical Propeller De-icing 
Ice is likely to form on the inner third of the back of the blade because of the slower rotational speed at this radius and the lower air pressure. To combat this, electrically heated boots are fitted around the blade's leading edge. Sometimes a double boot is used to cover up to 50% ofthe blade. The electrical power is transferred from the static supply to the rotating propeller via a slip ring and brushes 
The action of the heater mat is to loosen the ice's grip and allow centrifugal force to fling the ice outward. Beyond 50% of the blade length the higher rotational speed prevents the ice from adhering to the blade. 
To reduce the electrical load the power is cycled from the inner boots to the outer boots. Ifthe blades are in even pairs then power is applied to one pair at a time and this also helps keep the propeller in balance. For three and five bladed propellers all the blades are heated at the same time. 
When the system is cycling lumps of ice occasionally hit the fuselage, this causes no damage but does distress the passengers! Often a doubler plate is fitted at that point on the fuselage to minimise the chance of damage from flying ice. 




Slip rings Timer la Switch 
Amm~ r .___ __,}'-"""__ To power source 
Typical light aircraft propeller de-icing system 

The propeller spinner is normally electrically anti-iced rather than de-iced because ice tends to stay there once it is formed. 

Ice and Rain Protection 
Light Aircraft Cockpit Indications 
>, >, >, 
~ ~ ~ 

For light aircraft the propeller de-icing system works at only one ~ ~ ~ 
Flashing Flashing Flashing Lamp operation ·······• . ••• • ••••• •••• • • ·······• ... . ··········• 
speed when selected on and an indication of operation is given by 
Slow cycle (secs) 60 15 90 15 60 120
a dedicated ammeter needle dropping to a null (zero) as it 
Fast cycle (secs) 20 30 20 40 
switches from one heater mat to another. When heating the 
blades the ammeter needle should indicate within a marked range on the gauge. 
Heating current in flight 
Turbo-Prop Cockpit Indications 
Turbo-Prop systems operate at two possible speeds and the cycle can include all electrical anti-icing and de-icing systems, again to even out the electrical load. 
21 Amps (approx) Air intakes  21 Amps (approx) Propeller &spinner  21 Amps (approx) Air intakes  
Air intake lips & windscreen continuously heated  •  3Amps (approx) ! I  

While the anti-icing systems are working a green light will be on 
+--------Slow cycle 6 mins

continuously. When both de-icing and anti-icing systems are Fast cycle 2 mins operating it will flash. This diagram shows typical times for a turbo prop anti-icing plus de-icing cycle. The fast cycle is for light icing conditions, the slow cycle is for heavy icing conditions. The electrical load is monitored on an ammeter (load meter). 
Ice and Rain Protection 
Fluid De-Icing System for Propellers 
Fluid de-icing systems can be found on smaller piston-engine 

aircraft. lsopropyl alcohol is pumped across the gap between the Vent line 
engine and the rotating hub into a slinger ring, where centrifugal Fluid tank 
action pumps it out on to a plastic distributor shoe. From there it 
spreads out across the blade. The fluid reduces the adhesion of 
the ice and then both ice and fluid are thrown off as the blades 
rotate. 

Control and flight deck indications of the system are combined with those of the airframe fluid de-icing system. Pump 
Ice and Rain Protection 

Pitot and Static Vent Heating 
Pitot and static vents are electrically heated continuously to prevent ice forming and blocking the vent holes. An amber warning light will illuminate on the flight deck if a pitot heater unit fails. 

Ice and Rain Protection 

Windscreen Protection Windscreen De-Icing 
The windscreens directly in front of the two pilots on large 
Selector 
transport aircraft are continuously electrically heated. Heating the 
switch 

windscreen not only anti-ices it and provides a measure of de­
Heating element misting but also makes it more malleable, so improving its resistance to impact and structural integrity. For this reason inoperative windscreen heating can be a no-go item or may restrict the aircraft speed and altitude. 
Normal High 
Electric heating elemens are thermostatically controlled to keep 

Auto
the windows at a temperature of around 35°C. A green light 
transformer •,___~ 
shows when the heaters are being powered. The heaters also ensure that the windscreen is bonded electrically to the airframe. It is often possible to select the heating to HIGH or LOW power. The normal setting would be LOW, with HIGH selected only with visible icing. LOW should also be selected initially to reduce the thermal shock. 
Some aircraft fitted with fluid de-icing systems also use fluid for windscreen de-icing. 

Indicator lamp 
Ice and Rain Protection 
Windscreen De-Misting 
A fan is provided to blow air up onto the front windows for rapid de­misting. 
Rain Repellent 
On light aircraft rain is removed from the windscreens by the curved shape of the screens and the slipstream. For some larger air transport aircraft, while the slipstream plays a part and wipers are fitted as standard, bleed air is blown up outside of the screen to help remove the rain. Most larger aircraft, however, are fitted with rain repellent systems. 
Rain repellent is very viscous oil, which is sprayed on to the outside of the front screens and is used with the wipers to improve visibility in heavy rain. The repellent is applied as a measured dose and when sprayed will cloud vision for up to 15 seconds. 

The rain repellent fluid originally used contained chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). It was both toxic and an ozone depleting agent, so the Montreal protocol banned its production and use in 1996. Despite this minor setback, new aircraft are still being fitted with rain repellent systems (electrically isolated), and the industry has recently developed some CFC free replacement fluid, most notably Donaldson Le Bozec, who have certification for several Boeing and Airbus types. 


Lesson 74 
Fuel Systems 

AGK74 
Fuel Systems 
Fuel Systems 
The job of the fuel system is to provide a suitable storage and delivery system such that fuel is delivered to the engine at pressures, flow rates and temperatures that meet the requirements of the engine. Light piston engine systems tend to be simple while turbo-jet systems are more complicated. 
This section considers the storage and delivery of fuel up to the engine high-pressure pump or carburettor, the types offuel, their grades and characteristics and the regulations covering refuelling and defuelling. 
Fuel Tanks 
Airframe fuel tanks can be of the rigid, flexible or integral type. 
Rigid tanks, usually made of aluminium alloy but not forming part ofthe aircraft structure, are used in the wings of light aircraft and in some larger aircraft as fuselage tanks. Their main disadvantage is the weight penalty. 
Flexible tanks are rubber bags attached to the aircraft structure by cords or buttons. Though lighter than rigid tanks their main disadvantages are that they are easily punctured, and that ridges can form in the bottom trapping water. 
ft.ihbf o 

Integral tanks are usual on large modern aircraft. They are made by sealing the aircraft's wing structure to make the tank this saves weight and allows the use of areas that would otherwise not be practicable. 
Larger integral and rigid tanks incorporate baffles to prevent the fuel sloshing about too much during manoeuvres. Baffle check valves prevent the movement offuel towards the wing tip. 
CS25 requires an expansion space of at least 2% of the tank volume when the tank is full. 
Rigid fuel tanks are used in the fuselage of large aircraft Flexible fuel tanks are used in light aircraft Integral tanks are used in the wings of large aircraft Baffles are fitted in larger fuel tanks 
Fuel Systems 
ft+i.bl o 
Light Aircraft Systems 

The fuel tanks in light aircraft are normally in the wings which can, Balance pipe High winged aircraft's 
of course, be located either above or below the aircraft's engine. 
High winged aircraft use a gravity feed to get the fuel to the 
carburettor, low winged aircraft use a mechanical fuel pump to 
draw the fuel from the tanks. As this could fail in flight an auxiliary 
electrical pump is fitted in parallel with the mechanical pump. 

Fuel Systems 
Vapour Locking 
As aircraft fly higher the ambient pressure drops, this allows the fuel to more easily change state from a liquid to a vapour. Iffuel changes into a vapour in a pipe, or if vapour enters a pipe, it can create a vapour lock which will reduce or stop the flow offuel. 
In order to prevent vapour locks a light aircraft can use an auxiliary fuel pump to increase the fuel pressure in the pipe. 
ft.lhbl o 

Venting 
The tanks are vented to allow air to replace the fuel as it is drawn off. 
A few light aircraft are vented by a ram air system. The increase in pressure above the fuel helps to reduce evaporation and aids fuel transfer. 
Most light aircraft tanks are vented to static pressure. This is normally done by leading the vent pipe out to the under surface of the wing into the high energy air. Most vent pipes of this type have a forward facing chamfer to gain some pressure from the ram effect. 
Tanks are vented inwards to allow air to replace the fuel pumped out 
Fuel Systems 
Fuel Feed 
Fuel is drawn off from a point above the bottom of the tank to prevent sediment or water entering the engine. This means not all the fuel in the tank can be used, and the remainder is referred to as unusable fuel. 
Water drains are located at the lowest point of the tank these allow a sample to be removed for inspection before flight. Fitted around the fuel draw off pipe is a coarse gauze mesh filter or finger screen to prevent large foreign objects from entering the supply system. The fuel is then passed through a low-pressure filter unit, sometimes referred to as a gascolator, that also incorporates a water drain. 
Finger screen 
Water drain 
-Fuel drawoff pipe 
There may be unusable fuel in the bottom of a fuel tank 
Fuel Systems 
Large Aircraft Systems 
Large multi-engine air transport aircraft fuel systems have more regulatory requirements placed on them this is reflected in their design. Provision must be made to allow the fuel to continue to feed to the engines in the event of system failures. 
The 8737 system is shown in this diagram. It is typical of a modern jet transport fuel system. It has three tanks, one in each wing and one in the fuselage. Each tank has two low pressure (LP) fuel pumps in it and a variety of sensors and back-up systems. The LP fuel system feeds engine driven high pressure (HP) fuel pumps at the engines. 
There are at least two LP booster pumps in each tank often with two power sources 
Fuel pumps, both LP and HP, are shown on the diagram by this symbol 
Engine 
fuel 
shutoff 
valve 
Fuel scavenge shutoff valve 
ft.iffbl o 
Engines operating all pumps on centre tank feeding engines 
LP fuel feed 
= 
Fuel Systems 
Trim tanks 
Some aircraft employ a trim tank in the horizontal stabiliser to optimise the CoG and save fuel in the cruise. Once established in the cruise fuel is pumped rearwards into the trim tanks moving the CoG rearwards. Either before or during the descent the fuel is moved forward again to improve longitudinal stability. 
Low Pressure Fuel Pumps 

On larger air transport aircraft each fuel tank has two LP pumps these may also be referred to as LP Booster Pumps. Booster pumps are low pressure centrifugal pumps, supplying the fuel at between 20 and 100 PSI. 
The pumps are electrically powered from the aircraft's 11 SV AC supply. Each pump in a pair is supplied from a different AC busbar so a single generator failure will only affect one pump in each tank. Some aircraft, but not the B737, have a backup DC supply. 
To reduce stress at the wing roots of an aircraft, fuel is fed from the inboard tanks first. In the B737 system shown, the pumps in the centre tank operate at a higher pressure than the wing tanks, this ensures that the centre tank feeds the engines first. 
ft+M+lo 

Flapper
To 
valve

engine 
(NRV) 
----1 
There are at least two LP booster pumps in each tank often with two power sources 
Fuel Systems 
ft.Hft o 
Low Pressure Fuel Pumps continued 
LP fuel pumps are located in feeder boxes at the bottom of the fuel 
tanks. The feeder boxes have flapper valves that allow fuel into 
the box but prevent the fuel flowing out as the aircraft is 
manoeuvred. This ensures the pump is always submerged in fuel, 

even when the tank is nearly empty, and prevents cavitation. The To 
engine
fuel also cools and lubricates the pumps during operation. 
A water drain valve will be fitted in the sump, which is the lowest part of the tank. 

Feeder boxes prevent LP pump captivation 
There are at least two LP booster pumps in each tank often with two power sources 
Fuel Systems 
ft.f:h%l o 
The Low Fuel Pressure Light 

Non-Return or Check Valves 


I 
The LP fuel light indicates low fuel pressure at the output of each 

Non return valves are shown as an arrow in a box. They only
LP fuel pump, effectively indicating the pump has been turned off 

allow fuel flow in the direction of the arrow and so stop fuel flowing 
or has failed. The sensors are transducers or bellows, depending 

back into the tank if the LP pumps are turned off. 
on type, bellows are shown on the B737. 
Fuel Systems 
ft+Mi._o 
Suction or Bypass Valves 
In normal use, the LP pumps ensure that the fuel is pressurised up to the engine's high pressure pump (HP) in order to prevent vapour locks. If the LP pumps fail suction or bypass valves allow the HP pump to draw the fuel from the tank and still give 75% of its power rating. In modern jets there may be a power reduction and a risk of flame out at altitude. Some aircraft have an altitude restriction which will clearly affect range and may affect terrain clearance in mountainous regions. Bypass valves are shown on the B737 fitted in the fuel supply pipe downstream of the LP pumps in the wing tanks. 
A pressure sensor is fitted just before the engine HP pump and activates a warning light in the flight deck if inlet pressure to the pump is reduced. 


Bypass valves allow fuel to flow if the LP pumps fail 
Fuel Systems 

Jet Pumps 
Jet pumps can be used to move large volumes of fuel within the fuel tank system from tank to tank or to keep a booster pump box full of fuel. They make use of the venturi principle, where a small volume offuel ejected under pressure passing through a venturi will draw with it a large volume of the fuel surrounding it. 
The 8737 shows one jet pump which uses No.1 Tank forward LP pump output pressure to scavenge fuel from the centre tank after the main LP pumps have been turned off. The fuel scavenge shutoff valve opens automatically when both centre tank LP pumps are turned off. 
To booster pump box 


Fuel Systems 
Engine Fuel Shut-off Valve 
The engine fuel shutoff valve is DC operated from the hot battery busbar. It shuts off LP fuel supply to the engine when either: 
¦ 
the appropriate engine fire handle is pulled or 

¦ 
the engine start lever is placed to CUTOFF. 


When shut the associated indication on the fuel panel comes on. 
FUEL VALVE CLOSED 
Fuel Tank Pressurisation 
Fuel tanks are pressurised in order to prevent vapour locks forming in the supply pipes after LP pump failure. Pressurisation also reduces the amount of vapour given off by the fuel. 
Some large aircraft use bleed air from the engines to pressurise their tanks to 5 PSI above ambient. An overpressure relief valve vents excess pressure to atmosphere. 
Other aircraft, including the B737 series, use ram air through the vent system to pressurise the fuel. The ram air intakes are located on the underside of the wings. 
ft.iiiifrlo 

Fuel Tank Venting 
Fuel tanks are vented to prevent excessive positive or negative pressures damaging the tanks. This is particularly important in the wing tanks because they are integral to the aircraft structure, if the fuel tank is damaged the wing is damaged. 
On some large aeroplanes the fuel tanks may be vented through air intakes on the underside of the wing. 
On the B737 the vent system feeds to vent surge tanks at the wingtips. These contain a pressure relief valve which will pop open and subsequently stay open if the vent system contains pressures too far above or below ambient. 
Vent Surge Tanks 
Vent surge tanks are located at the extreme tips ofthe wings and are integral to the aircraft structure. Normally empty, they collect fuel overflow into the vent lines during attitude changes and allow it to drain back into the main tanks. If the fuel overflow is too much for the vent surge tanks they vent the excess to atmosphere through outlets at the wingtips. 
Fuel Systems 

Crossfeed Valve 
The crossfeed valve is used is to rectify a fuel imbalance between the wing tanks by feeding both engines from the same tank, or to feed the remaining engine from both tanks following an engine failure. 
The crossfeed valve must be closed for take-off and is normally closed in flight. If it is necessary to correct a fuel imbalance the crossfeed valve is opened by a selection on the overhead panel, the LP pumps in the wing tank with less fuel are turned off. Procedures to correct a fuel imbalance must be monitored by both pilots. 
This diagram shows a fuel imbalance being corrected. The centre tank is empty and the LP pumps have been turned off, the corresponding Low Fuel Pressure lights are on. The No.1, left, tank has more fuel in it and will be used to supply the engines until the wing tank contents are equal. 
Engines operating no 1 tank pumps on  
all other pumps off  
crossfeed open  
no 1 tank  
feeding engines  
LP fuel feed  
=  
Engine fuel  
shutoff  
valve  
Fuel  
scavenge shutoff  
valve  
No. 1  
tank  
scavenge jet pump  

Fuel Systems 
One of the problems with jet fuels is that at temperatures below -40°C solid wax-like particles begin to form. To counter both waxing and the possibility water in the fuel could form ice crystals which might block the low-pressure filters, jet aircraft systems usually heat the fuel at the engines just before the fuel filters. 
Heating can be from oil/fuel heat exchangers that use hot engine lubricating oil, or from air/fuel heat exchangers using use hot engine bleed air. The oil/fuel heat exchangers are called Fuel Cooled Oil Coolers (FCOCs), they heat the fuel and cool the oil. 
Control of fuel temperature is usually automatic but can be manual in response to a warning lamp. On modern aircraft the pilots can monitor fuel temperature on the ECAM FUEL page. In the fuel tanks the fuel can be heated by using the excess heat from the hydraulic system. Here the returning hydraulic fluid is passed through a heat exchanger, located in the bottom of the tank below the level of the unusable fuel. Should a leak occur the leak would be from the high-pressure hydraulic fluid into the fuel tank. This is a less dangerous situation than fuel leaking into the hydraulic system. Fuel in fuselage tanks is not heated deliberately, the problem here is usually keeping the fuel temperature down. 
Fuel temperature control is usually automatic 


The flight crew on transport aircraft are given some or all of the following indications: 
¦ Fuel quantity -indicated either as volume or weight. On older aircraft the contents of each tank or group of tanks was displayed on individual gauges, modern aircraft use a totaliser gauge which shows either the aircraft's total fuel load or the load in selected tanks. There is also a separate fuel low level warning system. 
¦ 
Fuel temperature -this is more important for turbine engined aircraft due to the likelihood of the kerosene becoming waxy. 
¦ 
Fuel flow -indicated as pressure, weight per hour, volume per hour or as a percentage of power. Informs the crew about the engines fuel consumption. 
¦ 
Filter light -illuminates when the fuel filter starts to block or clog. 



Lesson 75 
Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 

AGK75 
Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 
Fuel Contents Gauging 
The range obtainable from a fuel depends on its calorific value, or energy content. For any specific fuel the energy available depends on fuel mass, and it is more important to know the fuel mass rather than the fuel volume. 
Early aircraft used a mechanical float operating a mechanical gauge to give a volumetric indication of the tank contents. This is only accurate when the aircraft is level and at a constant temperature. It is, however, a cheap, simple and reliable system. Modern fuel gauging systems include a low level warning to warn the pilots there is around 30 minutes flight remaining. 
Resistive System 
In the resistor system the mechanical linkage is replaced with an electrical resistor and a gauge operated by DC. Any change in the fuel level causes the float arm to move a wiper across the resistor, resulting in a varying signal being sent to the gauge. The system, although cheap and simple, is again limited as it only gives indication of volume and indications can fluctuate when the aircraft is manoeuvring. 
ft.iht.l o 

A major drawback for volumetric indication is that the fuel contracts when it is cold and expands when it is hot, so a variation in temperature alters the contents reading. This effect is particularly noticeable on the first flight of the day. If the aircraft were filled up the night before the fuel would have been dense. 
As the temperature rises and the fuel expands it occupies a larger volume and can vent on to the manoeuvring area. 
Fuel mass can be obtained from fuel quantity if the specific gravity (SG) is known. This can be calculated, or there may be an adjustable SG compensator in the gauging system. 
Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 
ft+iff-lo 
The Capacitance System 
The capacitance system eliminates this problem by effectively 
weighing the fuel on board and displaying the quantity offuel as a 
mass or weight. 

To gauge 
The capacitance unit or capacitor consists of three concentric 
tubes one inside the other. The outer tube is an earth screen, the 
inner tube at low potential and the innermost at high potential. In 
this diagram the earth screen has been omitted for clarity. The 
general term for a substance between the plates of a capacitor is 
dielectric, the dielectrics here are fuel and air. As fuel has roughly 
twice the capacitance of air the amount of capacitive reactance 

indicates how much of the tube is covered by fuel. This is a Reference or 
compensating unit 
volume measurement. 

Capacitance systems are preferred as they indicate fuel mass not volume 
Fuel has twice the capacitance of air 
Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 
ft+itf-lo 
The Capacitance System continued 
Fuel, however, has a different capacitance for different densities. The capacitance increases as density increases. The reference unit, which is in the unusable fuel and therefore always remains submerged, measures the actual capacitance for the fuel in the tank. This data allows the gauge to convert the output from volume to mass of fuel. Several tube units are located in each tank, wired in parallel for redundancy. Any change in density will still affect the volume in the tank, but the mass or weight displayed will be the same. 
If there is water in the tank it will lie at the bottom and cover the reference unit. Pure water has a co-efficient of capacitance eighty times that of air and forty times that of fuel. The gauging system interprets this as a massive calorific value and shows the contents off the scale at maximum. 
Fuel gauges only indicate the usable fuel, and electrically operated gauges will always go to zero when the power is removed or if the system fails. Electrical gauges can work through a ratiometer or a galvanometer. Both need external power. The ratiometer will read correctly if power fluctuates, the galvanometer will not. 

To gauge 

If there is water in the tank it will read full scale full Fuel gauges always read zero after failure 
Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 

Manual Measuring Systems 
Although modern aircraft have sophisticated fuel computers and capacitance systems, fuel reconciliation checks on the ground require some basic old-fashioned methods. Two examples of these are drip sticks and magnetic sticks. 
Drip Stick 
A drip stick consists of a hollow tube with a small hole in the side just below the top at the bottom is a tap. When not in use the drip stick is locked up inside the tank. To take a reading the tube is drained, then lowered until fuel starts to drip steadily from the tap. This indicates the correct position for a reading to be taken from the junction of the stick and the wing. Ifthe hole is below the surface of the fuel a steady stream of fuel will run from the tap. Most transport aircraft will have multiple sticks in each tank -for example, the 737-300 had five in each wing tank. 


To be absolutely certain of the contents the tanks still need to be dipped 
Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 
ft+itf-lo 
Magnetic Sticks 
Magnetic sticks differ by using a float with a permanent magnet located around a sealed tube, inside the tube is a measuring stick, again with a magnet. The stick is unlocked and lowered until the float supports the stick and the reading is taken in the same manner as with the drip stick, as shown in this animation. 
With both types of stick the crew need to consider the attitude of the aircraft, as any deviation from level in pitch or roll means that the fuel is also not level. This is achieved on some aircraft by a small spirit level for each parameter located inside the landing gear well for ease of access on the ground. The attitude is calibrated in degrees of pitch and roll, and a correction is calculated from the data tables for that aircraft. A grid table for each aircraft will determine how many of the drip sticks or floatsticks will need to be pulled for each tank. 
Further data tables give both volume and mass equivalents for a given reading on the sticks, using an average specific gravity value for the fuel. Typically such a chart would give litres, US gallons, Imperial gallons, kilograms and pounds. 



Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 
ft+Mirlo 
Fuel Flow Gauging 
Fuel flow can be used to monitor the performance of a jet engine. Fuel flow integrated over time is used for comparison with the fuel quantity gauging system as an indication offuel used. 
Fuel flow can be measured either as a volume flow or a mass flow. Of the two, mass flow is preferred as the calorific value ofthe fuel is proportional to its mass, not its volume. The flow meter is fitted after the Fuel Control Unit, between the HP cock and the engine. 

From HP pump 
/ --Fuel metering valve 
----..---­
Fuel control unit 

Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 
ft+Hito 
Fuel Jettisoning 
Air transport aircraft that have a Maximum Landing Mass (MLM) significantly lower than the Maximum Take Off Mass (MTOM) must have a fuel jettisoning system. The system must be capable ofjettisoning enough fuel within 15 minutes to allow the aircraft to land at MLM following a take-off at MTOM. The 8737, like many short-haul aircraft, does not have a jettison system. 
When fitted, jettison systems operate from the refuelling gallery pipe. Selecting fuel jettison opens a valve or valves and the fuel is pumped out using the LP booster pumps. 
A jettison limit switch ensures that sufficient fuel remains on board for take off, climb to 10 000 ft and cruise for 45 minutes. Occasionally an auxiliary jettison control is fitted to allow a second and separate selection to continue the jettison below these limits. 
The diagram shows a typical fuel system with jettison in progress through a refuelling gallery pipe. 
Other than in an emergency, jettisoning must not be carried out below an altitude at which the fuel will not evaporate before hitting the ground, in precipitation and over built up areas. 
Bleed ram air T ssurization 

Most big aircraft have fuel jettison systems The main jettison system retains an automatic reserve 
Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 
fti+H+lo 
Refuelling 
Light aircraft are refuelled through filling points on the top surface of the wings. This is called overwing or gravity refuelling. Air transport aircraft are refuelled and defuelled via an under wing connection. The fuel is forced in under pressure, so it is called pressure refuelling. The maximum pressure for this is 50 PSI the maximum suction for defuelling is -5 PSI. 
Pressure refuelling allows automatic operation, where the amount of fuel to be added or defuelled is pre-selected. The refuelling valve will automatically close when the pre-set is achieved. Tank sequencing can also be automatic. A Volumetric Top Off unit (VTO) will also close the refuelling valve when the tank is full. 


The maximum pressure for pressure refueling is 50 PSI 
Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 
ft+Mirlo 
Fuel Sampling 
Fuel has to be checked, before the first flight of each day, to ensure that it is free from contamination from water and sediment. This is done by taking a sample offuel from each tank in turn. A clear container is used the fuel must be clear and bright. 
¦ 
Clear means that the sample is clear of sediment, free of water or foreign matter such as fungal growth. 

¦ 
Bright means that when the sample is held up to the light it is a clear even colour -cloudiness can be caused by particles of water reflecting and refracting the light or air. Air clears upward quickly, water clears downward over a period of time -this water is said to be in suspension, entrained or dissolved. 


If doubt exists over a sample of kerosene, which could be pure water, place a small quantity ofwater into a clear tube and mark its meniscus then add the sample to be checked. Ifthe sample is water then the meniscus will move up the container, if it was fuel then the water and fuel will separate and there will be a meniscus between the two. 
Water detecting paste or paper can be used. This is attached to a rod and lowered into the fuel but kept clear of the bottom of the tank, it must not be kept in the fuel for more than 10 seconds. If water is present then the paper or paste will change colour, normally to green. 
Fuel 

Fuel
Air --+---. 
bubbles 
Water Water in suspension 

Sediment 

If a sample has any trace of contamination the tank must be drained until all traces of contaminant are removed. 
Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 
Refuelling Precautions 
Refuelling is said to have started when the filler caps have been removed and continues until they are refitted. 
A 6 metre radius refuelling zone is taken from the open refuelling poinUconnection and any vents. 
Aircraft are refuelled before standing overnight to prevent condensation forming in the tanks. Full tanks present a fire risk, and empty tanks present an explosion risk. 
Before refuelling starts the aircraft must be bonded to earth and to the refuelling equipment. 
Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 
ft+iiif+lo 
Fuel Types 
The two major types of fuel used in aviation are Aviation Gasoline (AVGAS) for piston engines and Aviation Kerosene (AVTUR) for turbine engines. Diesel engine aircraft use AVTUR. 
Before looking in detail at each fuel, it pays to look at some of the terms used. 

Volatility  The ability of a liquid to change into a vapour, it is affected by temperature, pressure and surface area.  
Gas Pressure  The ambient pressure above the liquid fuel, which prevents the liquid changing into a vapour. A fuel with a high vapour pressure will boil off at a lower altitude.  
Flash Point  The lowest temperature at which there is sufficient vapour to support a momentary flame.  
Fire Point  The lowest temperature at which there is sufficient vapour to support a continuous flame.  
Auto Ignition Temperature (AIT)  The temperature at which the fuel will self ignite.  
Viscosity  The resistance to flow, viscosity increases with a decrease in temperature.  
Waxing  Affects kerosene fuels, as the temperature drops the fuel takes on the consistency of wax.  
Freezing Point  The temperature at which the last crystal of frozen fuel melts.  

Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 
Aviation Gasoline (AVGAS) 
Aviation gasoline is graded according to its octane rating the higher the octane rating the greater the resistance to detonation or knock. 
Octane rating is expressed as two numbers, e.g. 100/130 the lower number corresponds with the resistance to knock with a weak mixture, the higher number with a rich mixture. The greater the fuel's resistance to detonation, the higher the engine's working pressure can be. The fuel grade is normally referred to by the first number, e.g. 100 grade. 
Gasoline has a high saturation vapour pressure so is more volatile than jet fuel. It has low freezing point (-60°C), a low flash point (-45°C), and a Specific Gravity of 0. 72. 

Grades 
There are three grades of AVGAS in use, these are: 
¦ 
80 grade. This is coloured RED for identification and is used in older low powered engines. 

¦ 
100 grade. This is coloured GREEN for identification and is used in higher-powered engines. 

¦ 
100 LL. This is coloured BLUE to identify that it is a Low Lead fuel, which is used in high powered engines to reduce fouling. 100 LL is manufactured to DERD 2485 and has a freezing point of approximately -60°C 



The colour difference between these fuels denotes octane rating. 
The lead used in aviation gasoline is tetra-ethyl lead. 
Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 
MOGAS 
Some lower powered piston engines are able to legally operate on car fuel, motor gasoline -MOGAS. It is prohibited for use in commercial aviation. The general safety considerations that apply to aircraft with more than 25% MOGAS in their tanks are: 
¦  Aircraft using MOGAS must not fly above 6000 ft.  
•  Aircraft using MOGAS must not fly if the fuel tank temperature is 20°C or above.  
•  Aircraft using MOGAS are more likely to suffer carburettor icing and vapour locking, due to increased volatility and water content.  
•  Use of MOGAS can affect seals and hoses, so use of MOGAS is recorded in the Maintenance Log.  


Aviatiation Kerosene (AVTUR) 
Aviation kerosene has a Specific Gravity of 0.8. It is generically known as AVTUR, Aviation Turbine fuel. 
Kerosene has a low gas pressure so is less volatile than gasoline, it has a higher flash point (60°C). The comparative disadvantages are that the kerosene has a higher freezing point and it becomes viscous and waxy as it cools down. 
In order to lower the freezing point and to prevent waxing, pure kerosene is mixed with additives to produce the two common jet fuels: JETA which has a freezing point of -40°C and the more widely used JET A1 which has a freezing point of -47°C. 
Kerosenes range in colour from light straw to clear. 
Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 
Extra Additives 
Most civilian aircraft have mechanisms to heat the fuel to prevent ice crystals forming and blocking the filters. Some military aircraft require Fuel System Icing Inhibitors (FSII) to be added to the basic fuel. These combine with water particles in the fuel and prevent ice crystals from forming. JETA1 with FSII is also used in rotor craft operations. Biocides can also be added to suppress fungal growth and kill off micro-organisms in the tanks. 


Which statement is true? 
• 
There are three grades of AVGAS in use: 

80 grade, coloured green, used in lower powered engines; 100 grade, coloursed blue, used in higher powered engines; and 100 LL, coloured yellow, a low lead fuel used in higher powered engines 


• 
There are four grades of AVGAS in use: 


80 grade, coloured red, used in lower powered engines; 100 grade, coloursed green, used in higher powered engines; 100 LL, coloured blue, a low lead fuel used in higher powered engines 120 LL, coloured yellow, a low lead fuel used in high 
Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 

Wide Cut Fuels 
To overcome the ignition problem, older American fuels used a mixture of 70% gasoline with 30% kerosene this lowers the fire point. These are referred to as wide cut or wide range distillates. 
They must be treated as gasoline for safety reasons. If a wide cut fuel is used in an engine that has been set up for pure kerosene, then the engine fuel control unit (FCU) must be adjusted for the change in specific gravity. Wide cut fuels are not approved in EASA operated aircraft. 
Wide Cut Fuels are: ­
¦ Jet B 


• JP4 
0 Flash Point: 38°C 0 Flash Point: 38°C 0 Flash Point: ·23'C 
¦ AVTAG DERD 2486 
0 Freezing Point: -10'C 0 Freezing Point: -17'C 0 Freezing Point: -60'C 
Wide cut fuels, being Gasoline based, have a freezing point of -60°C, so the freezing point for Jet A is at a higher temperature than that for Jet B. 
The flash point for Jet A is at a higher temperature than that for Jet B. 
The specifications, colours and temperatures are summarised in the image opposite. 




Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 
ftiiHfl 
Gas Turbine Fuel Specifications 
Two organizations have taken the lead role in setting and maintaining specifications for civilian aviation turbine fuel, the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence (MOD). Many other countries issue their own national specifications for jet fuel which are very nearly, or completely identical to either the ASTM or MOD specifications. The two major jet fuel specifications are: 
¦ 
ASTM D 1655 The specification for two kerosene-type fuels ( Jet A and Jet A-1) and a wide-cut fuel ( Jet B ). Jet A is used for almost all domestic commercial aviation flights in the United States. 

¦ 
Defence Standard 91-91 The UK MOD specification for Jet A-1, which is used for most civil aviation fuels outside the United States, Russia and its former satellite states. 


There are only minor differences between the DEF STAN 91-91 JetA-1 andASTM D 1655Jet A-1 specifications. 



Fuel Types and Contents Gauging 

Grade Labels 

Grade labels are used to identify equipment that is used with Grade Label Pipelines specific fuels. Grade labels can be painted on the sides of fuel 10 cm 10 cm 10 cm 10 cm 30 cm bowsers (tankers) or marked on a sleeve that is fitted around a fuel pipe or refuelling hose. 
JET A1 
The Mogas grade label will have a yellow stripe in place of the blue stripe and the legend Mogas in white on the red background. 
1 

1cm 0.5 cm General pipeline colour
Certification regulations require that aircraft tanks are clearly marked near the refuelling point with tank contents and fuel grade. 15cm 10 cm 10 cm 30cm 




Lesson 76 
Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 

AGK 76 

Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 
ft+1&11o 
Fire and Smoke Detection and Suppression 
The prospect offire on board an aircraft in flight is very serious. The first line of defence is in the design and the materials used to construct the aircraft. The second line of defence is to detect the fire early enough for it to be fought and suppressed successfully. 
There are three methods of detecting a fire: 
¦ 
Visually. 

¦ 
By detecting smoke. 

¦ 
By detecting high temperature. 


As the old saying goes "there is no smoke without fire". People are excellent smoke detectors, especially a plane full of passengers. Places that are permanently staffed, such as flight decks and passenger cabins, do not require smoke or fire detecting units. These are called Class A compartments. 

Automatic Systems 
There is a requirement for duplication of automatic smoke and fire detection systems. Each detector is able to operate independently but they are normally operated in parallel, known as the double loop system, to prevent spurious warnings. Both detectors have to register the smoke or fire before the warning is given. To achieve this each pair of smoke detectors share a common air supply and two firewires or capillary tubes run side by side to form two loops for each fire detector. This makes use of an "AND" logic gate. 
A fault protection circuit inhibits the system when a detector line is connected to ground (earthed). Aircraft fire detection and suppression systems are DC powered. 
Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 
ft+ii1-lo 
Smoke Detection 
Smoke detection is required in: 
¦ 
Unmanned compartments that the crew can access during flight, such as avionics bays. These are called Class B Compartments. 

¦ 
Cargo bays and holds that are not accessible have smoke detection and remotely operated fire extinguishers and are called Class C Compartments. 

¦ 
Class D Compartments, cargo bays with increased fireproofing. The difference from a Class C compartment is that, if a fire does occur, it will not affect the structure of the aircraft and so is left to burn. 

¦ 
Class E Cargo compartments on aeroplanes used only for the carriage of cargo. 

¦ 
Galleys. 

¦ 
Toilets. It is mandatory to have a smoke detector unit in each toilet compartment. The warning can be given on the flight deck or a cabin crew station. 


Smoke detectors are required in galleys, toilets and class B, C & D compartments 

Ion Detection Systems 
Ion detection systems contain a small quantity of radioactive material that bombards the oxygen atoms in the air with alpha particles to create ions, charged gas molecules, in a small chamber. 
The ions that have been created allow a small current to flow through the air from one side of the chamber to the other. When smoke particles are present they absorb the alpha particles without ionising and cause the current to fall. The fall in current is sensed and a warning light or audio alarm is set off. 
Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 
ft+1I1-lo 
Optical Systems 
The second, and probably most common, system relies on the idea that smoke particles scatter light. This is the labyrinth smoke detector. 
The unit is located in an air extraction duct where a fan draws a constant flow of air through it. A beacon lamp is located upstream of the 'labyrinth' with a photoelectric cell at the other end. 
Under normal circumstances the labyrinth prevents the light from the beacon lamp reaching the photoelectric cell. In the event of a fire starting in the protected area smoke and fumes are given off. As these pass through the labyrinth they allow the light to reflect and refract on to the photoelectric cell creating a current. Detection of this current sends a fire warning signal to the flight deck. 
To test the smoke detector the pilot closes the test switch. This operates a relay switch that routes the power to a test lamp located behind the photoelectric cell. With test selected the lamps are wired in series so the complete circuit is tested. 
Pulsed infra-red LED 
I
PhotMlectrlc
beacon lamp 
Alarm
J I 
-, I [! ~ i" ~ 
Light proof chamber 


Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 

Fire Detection 
Areas that have fire detection systems are: 
¦ Jet engine bays. 
• APU bays. 
¦ Main gear bays. 
Jet Engine Zones 
Jet engine bays, nacelles or pods are divided into three zones: 
Zone 1 is the area surrounding the hydraulic pumps, ancillary gearbox, engine lubrication oil reservoir, fuel control unit and so on. This is the most likely place for a fire to start and is the only zone that has fire detection and remotely operated fire extinguishers. To reduce the chance offire spreading the zone is kept at a lower pressure than the other bays by a ventilation system. 
Zone 2 is the area where the compressor blades could touch the engine casing and create a metal fire. This would be indicated via the engine vibration monitoring system. This zone is hotter than Zone 1 
Zone 3 is the hottest Zone, as it is the area surrounding the engine and jet pipe aft of the combustion chamber. Zone 3 is separated from Zone 1 by a stainless steel fire bulkhead. 


Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 
ft+ii1-lo 
Pipes in Hot Zones 
If a combustible fluid or gas has to pass through a hot zone then it must be routed through a double skinned pipe (a pipe inside a pipe). 
Auxiliary Power Units 
APUs have their own fire detection and protection systems, and, as they can be left running unattended and during the refuelling operation, the protection system is automatic. In the event of a fire the APU will shut itself down and a fire warning will be activated. 
APUs can be divided into zones in the same way as the main engines, but in most cases the whole bay in which the APU is located is classed as Zone 1 . 

Wheel Bays 
Main gear bays are given overheat detection systems in case an overheated brake unit causes a fire. If there is a fire warning there is no extinguishing system available, the checklist or Quick Reference Handbook (QRH) will call for speed to be reduced below the gear operating speed, VLO, and the gear to be lowered to blow the fire out. 

Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 
ft+H+lo 
Resistive Fire Detection 
A fire detection system is made up of two independent loops of firewire supported by a central structure, either a piece of thicker wire or a more rigid tube. To avoid false fire warnings two loops are used. The two loops are usually referred to on control panels as Loop A and Loop B, and both have to be activated for a fire to be reported. 
A cross section of each resistive fire wire shows a fine central electrode surrounded by filler material inside a capillary tube. The two ends of the wire are brought together at a junction which is linked to an arrangement ofdiodes called a diode bridge or a "Wheatstone bridge". The capillary tube is earthed to the aircraft's structure. 
When the system is switched on a 28 volt DC electrical potential will be present in the central core but as this is an endless loop no current will flow. When the area to be protected is within its normal operating temperature range this is how the system will remain. 
Eltctric,I To 
u...Jy ----41-o......-...... ~ ng 
W' QfeUlt
.I 


,__----1 ~------­

C p ry Central 

cttodo 

Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 

Resistive Fire Detection continued 
As the temperature increases in a fire the resistance of the filler material drops. It is sometimes described as having a negative co-efficient of resistance, and there is an increased leakage of current to ground via the capillary tube. This flow of electricity unbalances the Wheatstone bridge, which allows a signal to be sent to the appropriate logic circuit. 
If the fire wire is crushed in any way and the central electrode earthed it can cause a false fire warning. 
When system test is selected the detection loop is earthed out and a continuous red light illuminates on the appropriate panel the aural warning sounds. The test is for the electrical continuity of the system. It does not test for heat operation. 
Eltctric,I To 
u...Jy ----41-o ~
......-...... ng 
W' QfeUlt 
.I 


,__----1 ~------­
C p ry Central 



Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 

Capacitance Fire Detection 
The fire wires in the capacitance system look identical to those in the resistance system. In this system, however, the central electrode is connected to a charging and measuring unit. The charging unit charges the central electrode for a set length of time then discharges it into the measuring unit, where its capacitance is compared with a reference value. 
In a fire the capacitance of the system increases as the temperature increases, a positive co-efficient of capacitance. The measuring unit senses this and sends a signal to the logic circuit. 
Once again, if the fire wire is crushed it will earth out but now the loss of capacitance will prevent a fire warning from being given. A fault protection circuit inhibits the detector line. This is called a no fault fire detection system. 
Capacitance systems are generally preferred to resistance systems on the basis that no fire warning is better than a spurious one. A fire will probably show itself in other ways. The system test, when operated, alters the capacitance and a continuous red light illuminates on the appropriate panel. The aural warning sounds. 
Electrical ---1Charging 
To fire supply unit warning 
¦
circuit 

Continuous fire wire detection loop 


Central Capillary tube Support tube electrode ti Insulating filler material's 
Insulating resistance remains, filler capacitance increasesmaterial 
In a capacitance system the co-efficient of capacitance increases with heat 

Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 
ft+W+lo 
Systron Donner Fire Detection System 
The Systron Donner Fire Detector is a gas pressure activated system. It consists of a responder unit that incorporates two pressure switches and a capillary tube with a fine central core of titanium hydride. Around the core and acting on one of the pressure switches is 7 psi of helium gas this is referred to as the averaging gas. This pressure holds an integrity switch closed. 
Any drop in pressure will cause the switch to open, giving a failed signal. In a fire situation the titanium hydride gives off hydrogen gas, this raises the pressure to 40 psi, which closes the alarm switch. 
If the capillary tube is crushed the system will operate provided that there is a gas path to the responder unit. The system test checks the responder unit's electrical circuit and also tests the sensor by heating it electrically from the test circuit. 
To flight deck Alarm switch Averaging fire warning closes gas Titanium circuit ~ at 40 PSI helium hydride 
R••~~~der :1--+, ---1--13 
Capillary tube
1 
Integrity switch held closed at 7 PSI 

Crushed capillary tube still allows system to function if there is a gas passage 

Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 
Overheat Sensors 
Many aircraft have both fire and overheat warnings originating from the same engine fire detection system, the distinction between warnings being only one of temperature. 
Separate overheat sensors are used in ducts carrying hot bleed air, typically for airframe anti-icing, landing gear bays and occasionally in engine zone 3, around the jet pipe. 
Overheat sensors work on the principle of differential expansion as heat is applied. A tube which expands easily has a pair of low expansion rate spring strips inside (bi-metallic strips), each with a contact. These remain open until the outer tube gets hot. As it expands it stretches and pulls the springs together to close the contacts and make the warning circuit. If this type of detector is used for fire detection, a delay circuit is used to avoid false alarms due to vibration. The detectors are wired in parallel. 

Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 
ft+ii&fto 
Thermocouples 
Thermocouples are loops of wire made oftwo different metals joined end to end. One join is placed where the temperature is high, the hot junction, and one in the cockpit where the temperature is low, the cold junction. The difference in temperature causes a current to flow through the loop of wire. 
If there is a fire the current flow will increase for those thermocouples with their hot junction in the fire. The difference in current between these and a reference thermocouple is enough to operate a relay that, in turn, activates the warning system. 
The weakness with this system is that should the fire burn through the interconnecting cable, the system will fail completely. Testing is carried out by heating one of the thermocouples. 

Cold junction in the cockpit 
Hot junction in the exhaust 

Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 

Fire Warnings 

When the detecting units sense a fire, a signal is sent to the flight deck. The warning given will be one or more of these: 
¦ 
Red flashing attention-getters. 

¦ 
A warning bell. 

¦ 
A continuous red light on the central warning panel or, on an EFIS aircraft, a master fire warning light in front of the pilots. 

¦ 
A continuous red light in the appropriate panel or fire handle. 

¦ 
ECAM and EICAS warning messages. 


The engine fire warning consists of a warning light for each engine and a single alarm bell common to all engines. 
Attention getters and aural warnings can be cancelled but the continuous red lights will remain on until the fire is out. 

Master Fire Warnings Once the bell is silenced the checklist for the appropriate fire warning is actioned. When the fire goes out the master fire 
Most aircraft have a master fire warning light in clear view of the warning and the specific fire warning lights will also go out.
pilots. The diagram shows the lights on the glareshield panel of a B737. When any fire warning is set off the master fire warning light will illuminate and a bell will sound. Pressing the light silences the bell. 

Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 

Delayed Fire Warnings 
Certain fire and smoke warnings may be suppressed at critical stages of flight such as just after rotation and just before landing and announced only when the aircraft is in a safer situation. This prevents the pilot being distracted from the primary task of flying the aeroplane. 

Select the correct statement 
• The engine fire warning consists of a warning light for each engine and a single alarm bell common to all 
engines. Attention getters and aural warnings can be cancelled but the continuous red lights will remain on 
until the fire is out. 

• The engine fire warning consists of a warning light for each engine and a single alarm bell common to all 
engines. Attention getters and aural warnings can be cancelled but the continuous red lights will remain on until the warning is reset. • The engine fire warning consists of a warning light and alarm bell for each engine. Attention getters and aural 
warnings can be cancelled but the continuous red lights 
will remain on until the warning is reset. 


Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 
Cargo Bay Fire Protection 
Cargo bays use optical smoke detectors, several to each cargo bay. The system shown here is from a B737NG. There are two fire bottles, each with nozzles and squibs to discharge into either bay. The green lights under the DET and FAIL lights indicate the integrity of the squibs. 
The cargo fire warning consists of a bell, the master fire warning light, a continuous red FIRE light on the panel above and amber DET lights indicating which sensors have gone off. 
Pulling and rotating the arming switch will arm the squibs ofall the extinguisher nozzles that discharge into the affected bay the green ARMED light will illuminate under the first DSCH switch. 
Aft
The first extinguisher is discharged by lifting the guard on the firing 
•· Smoke detectors • hold
hold 
switch and pressing the button operation of this switch fires the squib and an amber bottle discharge light will illuminate in the switch. 
If the second bottle is required then pressing its firing button will also discharge it into the affected bay. No extra arming is required. 
When TEST is selected a fault in a smoke detector illuminates the amber FAIL lights. 

Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 

Engine Fire Extinguisher Operation 
The engine fire controls are usually located on the overhead panel. An engine fire is detected by the firewire loops sensing an overheat. It is indicated by the master fire warning light and bell and by a continuous red warning light in the fire handle of the appropriate engine. 
The first of the immediate actions is to close the throttle, then turn the fuel and ignition off, then pull the fire handle. 
Pulling the fire handle isolates the engine from: 
¦ 
Fuel by closing Aircraft (LP) and Engine (HP) fuel valves. 

¦ 
Hydraulics by closing shut off valves. 

¦ 
Electrics by opening the GCB and excitation breaker. 

¦ 
The pneumatic system by closing the bleed air shut off valves. 


Pulling the lever also arms the firing circuit to the extinguisher squibs. In some aircraft the audible warning may silenced. 
To operate the extinguisher the handle is turned. Referring to the diagram, if the fire was in N°1 engine the N°1 handle would be pulled and then turned to the left to fire squib A. 


Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 

Engine Fire Extinguisher Operation continued 
If one bottle fails to extinguish the fire then, normally after 30 seconds, the second bottle can be fired. In this case turning the handle to the right would fire squib C. Even if one bottle has put out the fire the pilot may discharge the second bottle into the engine bay as a precaution just before landing. 

Test functions are available for each engine fire warning system. When selected the fire handle will be illuminated and the audible warning will sound. The overheat warnings can also be tested. Three green lights at the bottom right hand corner of the panel show the integrity of the squibs and firing circuits. 
The OVHT DET switch in the top left corner of the panel can be selected to A to make Loop A the active fire detection loop or to B to make Loop B active. The NORMAL selection requires both loops to be activated for a fire warning to be given. With the switch in NORMAL if a fault is sensed in one loop that loop is 
Pulling the fire handle cuts off the fuel, turning it discharges the 
automatically de-selected and the remaining loop operates on its 
extinguisher. 
own. If both loops fail, or if a single selected loop fails, the FAULT 
In NORMAL operation both loops A and B must be activated to give
light illuminates. 
a fire warning 


Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 
APU Fire Protection 
The APU fire warning is on the same panel as the main engine fire warnings and works in a similar way except that there is only one extinguisher bottle that can be fired by turning the fire handle either way. 
When a fire is detected theAPU automatically shuts down. The APU fire warning light and the master fire warning light illuminate and the fire warning bell sounds. 
On the ground the APU fire warnings are repeated with a warning horn in the main wheel well and a flashing APU fire warning light. The aural warnings can also be silenced and the fire extinguisher activated from a panel in the wheel well. 
In the 8737 both main engine and APU fire detection systems use Systron Donner gas pressure activated detectors. 

Toilet Fire Extinguishers 
Fitted in the toilet compartment under the sink unit is a small fire bottle which has two nozzles, one directed into the waste bin and one under the sink. The nozzle is sealed with a low melting point metal which when heated melts and automatically discharges a fire suppressant chemical. This used to be Halon (Freon), a chemical that depletes the ozone layer. Production was banned globally in 1994. Nowadays the suppressant is likely to be heptafluoropropane (C3F7H), a 'clean agent'. 
A placard mounted inside the waste bin door has silver spots, these turn black as the temperature rises to indicate how hot the fire was. 
The fire extinguisher system is not connected to the smoke warning system in the toilets. 
Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 
Brake Fires 
Brake fires can occur after an overweight landing, a rejected take­off, or as a result of bad handling. Brake fires are fought by the airport Fire Section using a water mist which has the effect of reducing the temperature of the brake unit without causing too much thermal shock to the wheels. Do not fight brake fires with hand held extinguishers. Do not approach the brake units from the side because ofthe risk of explosion. 

Jet Pipe Fires 
Fires in this area are rare nowadays as most high bypass engines only have very short jet pipes. If there is a jet pipe fire on start up, there are normally no indications other than from the ground crew jumping up and down, and from excessive TGT. The actions vary from type to type but all involve cutting the fuel supply by turning the fuel and ignition off most involve pulling the fire handle. Some types recommend re-engaging the starter to blow the fire out, but if the fire handle is pulled no air is available for the engine starter motor. 



Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 
Fixed Fire Extinguishers with Squibs 
Fixed fire extinguishers consist of bottles made of copper or steel alloy filled with a fire-suppressant. Attached to the neck is an operating head. 
A single operating head will only deliver the fire-extinguishing agent to one area. To save weight by reducing the number of fire bottles carried a dual-operating head may be used so one bottle can protect two areas. Fixed extinguishers are used for the suppression of fire in the jet engine bays, APU bay, cargo bays and toilet areas. 
The preferred fire-extinguishing agent used to be BCF, as we have seen. Now it will be a 'clean agent' chemical suppressant. 
Fixed fire bottle 

Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 
Squibs 
With the exception of those used in the toilet fire all fixed fire bottles are discharged with squibs, little explosive charges. 
The suppressant is stored in the bottle as a liquid under pressure, sealed in by a piston in the operating head. A small black powder charge, the squib, is fitted into the operating head and wired to a switch on the flight deck. Operating the switch will cause electricity to detonate the squib, pushing the piston down and allowing the liquid to escape, changing into a gas in the process. Heads that are accessible have a small pin which will protrude from the base of the head indicating when the bottle has been fired in the normal way. 
Where the operating heads are not clearly visible a indication that the squib has been fired and the extinguisher discharged is displayed to the on the flight deck. 
Squib Test 
To test the firing circuit a small electrical current is passed through the squib. A green light on the test panel indicates that the circuit is serviceable. 

Over Pressurisation 
To prevent the bottle from exploding when subjected to excessive heat a pressure relief valve is fitted to the bottle. This consists of a frangible disc that ruptures and dumps the contents overboard. As it does so it blows out a green plastic disc leaving a red bowl visible. 
Fire and Smoke Detection Systems 

Classification of Fires 
Fires are classed by type. There is no common European classification, the following conforms to ISO 3941: 
Class A  Fires involving ordinary combustible materials which are best attacked with water to douse the flames and lower the temperature.  
Class B  Fires involving flammable liquids like fuel and paint that need to be smothered. Electrical fires.  
Class C  Gas fires.  
Class D  Burning metal.  
Class F  Cooking fats/oils in appliances.  


Which statement is correct? 
• In a capacitance or resistive fire detection system, if the fire wire is crushed, it may earth out, preventing a fire 
warning being given. 
• In a capacitance fire detection system, if the fire wire is crushed, it may earth out, preventing a fire warning being 
given. 
In a resistive fire detection system, if the fire wire is 
crushed, it may earth out, resulting in a spurious fire 
warning . 

• In a capacitance or resistive fire detection system, if the fire wire is crushed, it may earth out, resulting in a 
spurious fire warning. 
• In a capacitance fire detection system, if the fire wire is 


Lesson 77 
Oxygen and Breathing System 

AGK77 
Oxygen and Breathing System 
Oxygen Systems 
Oxygen is carried in pressurised air transport aircraft in case of emergencies such as cabin decompression or smoke and fumes on the flight deck. This is called supplemental oxygen. Supplemental oxygen for the flight deck is always gaseous and stored in cylinders. 
Passenger supplemental oxygen is usually chemically generated, the exceptions being on some Boeing aircraft, the B747 and B777, which use cylinders of gas for the passenger supply as well as the crew supply. 
Oxygen is also carried in the cabin for medical purposes. This first aid oxygen is always in portable bottles. 
Safety Precautions 
Care must be taken with the use of oxygen systems. Control valves should always be operated slowly and contact with grease must be avoided as it results in a chemical reaction that can lead to a spontaneous fire or explosion. For the same reason smoking should not be allowed if oxygen systems are in use. 
ft+IF·Ho 

Safety disk 
l 
Over pressure valve 
Oxygen equipment cannot be lubricated with grease 
Oxygen and Breathing System 
Gaseous Oxygen 
Gaseous oxygen is stored in steel cylinders. European cylinders are painted black with a white shoulder and neck American cylinders are all green. 
Gaseous oxygen is stored in the cylinders at a pressure of 1800 psi. This is reduced to an intermediate pressure of 80-100 psi and then to mask pressure of 8-10 psi. Oxygen cylinder content is sensed as a gas pressure and displayed as either a pressure in psi or bar, a volume in litres or remaining volume in eighths. Flow rates, when shown, are in litres a minute. 
Ambient temperature and the rate of replenishing can affect the volume of gaseous oxygen in the cylinder. To even out the temperature of the gas as it flows into a cylinder a thermal compensator is fitted to adjust the charging pressure. 
The thermal compensator consists of a tube with copper wire bristles in it. As the gas flows through the tube, the copper bristles even out the temperature through conduction. 
ftjff·•­

To stop an over pressurised oxygen cylinder exploding in an aircraft, a bursting or safety disc is fitted. When the pressure exceeds a predetermined limit the safety disc will rupture allowing the contents of that cylinder to escape to atmosphere. As it does so it will blow out a small green convex plastic disc leaving a red concave bowl visible it would also be indicated on the flight deck by a drop in the system contents. 
The advantages ofa gaseous oxygen system over chemical oxygen are 
¦ 
it is a self contained system 

¦ 
it can be filled from outside the pressure hull 

¦ 
the flow of oxygen can be regulated, it can be turned off 

¦ 
it has a larger capacity. 



The disadvantage is the extra weight that must be carried. 
Oxygen cylinders are black 
Oxygen is stored at 1800 PSI and reduced to 8-10 PSI at the mask 
A thermal compensator adjusts the charging pressure for temperature 
A blown safety disc leaves a red indication 
Oxygen and Breathing System 
Crew Oxygen Delivery Systems 
Light Aircraft Continuous Flow Systems 
Continuous flow systems are normally used in light aircraft for flights above 10 000 ft. 
Each mask has to be plugged in to a socket. When the pilot selects the oxygen supply on there is a continuous flow into each plugged in mask. 
ft+itido 
External filler valve Oxygen cylinder with protective cap Pressure gauge
Overhead console panel 
To pilot's i
~ 
mask + 
Continuous _ _.. flow coupling 
indic~ 
1i~i 
Each mask has to be plugged into a socket~ 

Oxygen and Breathing System 
Large Aircraft Diluter Demand Regulators 
Because of their complexity the diluter demand system regulators are only fitted at flight crew stations. They are called diluter demand systems because they mix air with oxygen in differing proportions, depending on cabin altitude, and because they only supply oxygen when the wearer of the mask breathes in, on demand. 
Depending on selection air is mixed with oxygen up to a cabin altitude of 32 000 ft at which point 100% oxygen is supplied. The system is able to exclude the cabin air and supply 100% oxygen on demand. In an emergency it is also able to supply 100% oxygen at a higher pressure as a continuous flow. 
The regulator has three controls: 
¦ 
A selector with three positions -Normal, Emergency and Mask Test. 

¦ 
A 100% oxygen selector with two positions, ON and OFF. 

¦ 
An ON/OFF selector to isolate the regulator from the supply. 



Demand diaphram 
TEST MASK Emergency lever EMERGENCY
{ 0 
NORMAL 
Oxygen selection lever { 
NO 
Barometric capsule Supply lever { ONHo<ic===+====~-­
OFF 
Air metering valve 
CabinairD 100%oxygen D Pressurised oxygen ¦ 
Supply can be an air mix, 100% oxygen on demand or 100% oxygen under continuous flow 
Diluter demand systems are only used on the flight deck 
Oxygen and Breathing System 
Components and Operation 
The heart of the unit is the pressure regulator, which is made up of a chamber and demand valve. The chamber is split in two by a diaphragm. One side of the chamber is vented to cabin pressure. The other (the oxygen side) is linked to the supply via the demand valve and the user's mask. In the oxygen side of the chamber a pressure relief valve is fitted to protect the user. The three­position selector is connected to and acts on the diaphragm the other side is connected via a bow spring to the demand valve. 
As the user inhales a partial vacuum is created in the chamber, deflecting the diaphragm to the right. This causes the demand valve to be lifted off its seat allowing oxygen to flow in. As the pressure rises in the chamber the diaphragm is moved to the left closing down the demand valve, having the effect of regulating the pressure supplied to the user. On selecting 'ON' oxygen flows up to the demand valve. 
ft.ifid o 

Normal Operation with 100% Selected Off 
The wearer of the mask on breathing in will cause a partial vacuum in the mask and through to the chamber. This demand, as well as unseating the demand valve allowing some oxygen into the chamber, will also draw in cabin ambient air via the air metering valve. The user will then breathe cabin air enriched with oxygen. As the cabin altitude increases, the barometric capsule will progressively close the air inlet and open the oxygen port, increasing the proportion of oxygen. 
At 32 000 ft the air-metering valve will close the air supply completely, so that the user is on 100 % oxygen. Remember that, at 33 000 ft, sea level conditions can be maintained by breathing 100 % oxygen. 
Air mix becomes 100% oxygen at 32 000 ft cabin altitude 
Oxygen and Breathing System 
Normal Operation with 100% Selected On 
Iffor some reason the flight deck air were contaminated with smoke, but the cabin ambient altitude was below 32 000 ft the user would get a mixture of contaminated air and oxygen. By selecting 100 % the air inlet port is closed and supplementary oxygen valve opens to increase the flow as the user demands it. This is because the air metering valve will still be reacting to the lower cabin altitude. 
A selection of 100% oxygen excludes cabin air 
Emergency Selection 
On selecting emergency at any altitude the diaphragm will be forced over to the right, displacing the demand valve. The regulator will supply a 100 % continuous flow of oxygen at a higher pressure than the 'NORMAL' demand supply. 
Test Mask 
The test function is only used for testing the mask. It operates at a higher pressure than the emergency selection and would become painful if breathed. 

n +e+•o 
Demand diaphram 
TEST MASK Emergency lever EMERGENCY 0
{ 
NORMAL 
Oxygen selection lever { 
NO 
Barometric capsule Supply lever { ONHo<ic===+====~-­
OFF Air metering valve 
CabinairD 100%oxygen D Pressurised oxygen ¦ 
A selection of 100% oxygen excludes cabin air 
Oxygen and Breathing System 
ftiHYo 
Flight Crew Oxygen Mask Stowage 
The masks are stored in special stowage units at the flight crew stations. The masks are extracted by squeezing the two red tabs on the front of the mask which stick out of the stowage unit. This releases the doors of the stowage allowing the mask to be removed and simultaneously supplies oxygen under pressure into the straps. 

Oxygen and Breathing System 
ft++·+•­
Flight Crew Oxygen Masks 
Flight crew oxygen masks must be capable of being fitted with one hand. Many aircraft use masks with inflatable elasticated tubes as straps. 
The inflated straps stretch out to form a 'basket' larger than the average head which allows the mask to be put on one handed. As the red tabs at the front of the mask are released oxygen pressure is removed from the straps and the elastic shrinks to fit neatly on the head. 
The masks are fitted over normal headsets. They incorporate microphones to allow two way communication. 

Oxygen and Breathing System 
Walk Around Oxygen Sets 
To enable crew members to function away from their seats walk around oxygen sets are positioned in the flight deck and main cabin. These cylinders contain 120 litres ofoxygen at 1800 PSI and can have either 2 or 3 flow rates, dependent on type. The flow rates are: 
¦ 
2 Litres per minute for 60 mins. 

¦ 
4 Litres per minute for 30 mins. 

¦ 
10 Litres per minute for 12 mins. 



n +e+•o 
Which statements are correct? 
a. 
Airmix becomes 100% oxygen above 32,000 ft 

b. 
Selecting 100% oxygen closes the air inlet port 

c. 
Selecting emergency causes the regulator to supply 100% oxygen at the same pressure as the normal demand, irrespective of the altitude. 

d. 
The mask test function increases the supply pressure and may be used if there is contaminated cabin air . 


• a and b 
• a, band d 
• b, c and d 
a aandc 
Oxygen and Breathing System 
Passenger Oxygen Delivery Systems 

Controls and Indicators 
Passenger oxygen may either be deployed automatically by barostatic sensors that detect cabin altitude rising through a preset level, usually 13 300 ft to 14 000 ft, or by selection from the cockpit. Typical controls and indicators are shown on the panel shown here, actually from a B737. 
The pressure in the crew oxygen system is shown on the left. The guarded switch on the right is left in NORMAL for automatic mask deployment or, alternatively, the pressure sensors can be overidden by the crew and masks can be deployed by lifting the guard and selecting the switch to ON. When passenger oxygen is on the amber light comes on. 

Oxygen and Breathing System 
Chemical Oxygen Generators 
Air transport aircraft (other than the large Boeings) use chemical oxygen generators to provide passengers with oxygen in an emergency. 
The generators are located in the Personal Service Units (PSU) above the passengers' heads. The generators contain a solid charge block made of Sodium Chlorate and Iron Powder mixed together. Once the charge block is ignited it will burn continuously for 15 minutes producing more oxygen than it needs to support its own combustion. This excess of oxygen passes through an internal filter before being supplied to the user's mask at a temperature no more than 10°C above the ambient temperature. To save wasting oxygen and allow for cooling, a reservoir bag is fitted before the mask. 
ft.iiiiWo 
Sodium Chlorate Aluminium
and iron powder charge block case Filter Filter 
Firing mechanism 
Relief Thermal valve insulation 

Passenger oxygen is provided by chemical oxygen generators which will run for 15 minutes after activation 
Oxygen and Breathing System 
Chemical Oxygen Generators continued 
Although the masks will drop to the 'half hung' position automatically or when commanded from the flight deck the charge block will only ignite when a passenger pulls the mask down. This action pulls a lanyard which electrically fires an igniter. Both the mask release and the igniter use 28 Volts DC from the battery busbar (vital services busbar). 
The generators come in several sizes to supply 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6 masks. Each generator has a black strip and a white strip painted around it. The white paint is heat sensitive and will change colour to black if the unit is ignited. The generators have a shelf life of five years. 
The EU-OPS requirement is that there must be 10% more masks installed than seats fitted, to provide for infants or children not occupying a seat. 
The advantages of this system are that it is: 
¦ 
Inexpensive. 

¦ 
Lightweight. 

¦ 
Requires no maintenance. 

¦ 
Lower risk of explosion than gaseous oxygen. 


14,000 fl Barometric pressure switch 
PUMngef Hmct units Attt nt ltltlons 
Flow lndicMofl 
The generators are activated when the mask is pulled down by the passenger 
The unit turns black when fired 
Oxygen and Breathing System 
Chemical Oxygen Generators continued 
Disadvantages 
¦ 
It produces oxygen for a very short period, around 15 minutes. 

¦ 
Flow rate cannot be controlled to meet breather's demand. 

¦ 
The oxygen is smelly. 

¦ 
The masks mix oxygen with cabin air therefore do not provide smoke protection. 

¦ 
The canister gets very hot while producing oxygen. 


Remember, its purpose is to keep a passenger alive during a rapid descent to below 14 000 ft after a de-compression. 
Toilet Masks 
Oxygen masks must also be provided in the toilets. These are usually supplied from chemical generators. 
Gaseous Passenger Oxygen Systems 
From the passengers' point of view a gaseous oxygen system is indistinguishable from a chemically generated system. From our point of view the only significant difference at the PSU is that the masks are released by oxygen pressure when it is turned on, either automatically or by the pilot, not 28V DC. 
There are two masks in each toilet supplied by chemical generators 
Oxygen and Breathing System 
First Aid Oxygen 



First Aid, or therapeutic oxygen, is a mixture of air and oxygen that is given via a facemask from a bottle. Cabin crew are trained to administer it, nearly always to passengers with in-flight medical problems. The bottle discharges at approximately 3 litres a minute. 
EASA require that enough first aid oxygen is carried for the greater of 2% ofthe passengers, or one passenger for the entire time the cabin altitude is to be above 8000 ft. There must be at least two first aid oxygen bottles on board. 
Bottled oxygen is provided for medical use 
Oxygen and Breathing System 

Crew Smoke Protection (PBE) 
Flight Crew 
Protective Breathing Equipment (PBE) for the flight crew is the 
normal oxygen mask with goggles fitted over the top. The goggles can be ventilated from the oxygen mask, if required. Flight crew PBE requires an intercom system to be fitted. 

Mask fitted to head -Mask fitted to head, goggles in place ­Ventilation switch closed (up) Ventilation switch open (down) 
Oxygen and Breathing System 
Cabin Crew 
EU OPS requires PBE for cabin crew to cover at least the eyes, nose and mouth, and to provide 15 minutes oxygen supply. In reality it is normal for cabin crew to be provided with smoke hoods which cover the entire head. 
Some smoke hoods use a filtration system to remove toxic smoke from the air. The more common type have a continuous flow of 100% oxygen provided from a small bottle of gas. The oxygen is activated by pulling a toggle. 



Lesson 78 
Basic Electrical Theory and Circuits 

AGK78 

Basic Electrical Theory and Ci rcuits 
ft+IF·Ho 
Basic Electrical Theory 
In order to understand the flow of electricity we need to start by looking at the construction of atoms -the basic building units for all materials. An atom consists of a nucleus in the centre which contains positively charged protons and neutrally charged or uncharged neutrons. These are surrounded by orbiting electrons which are negatively charged. 
An electrical current occurs in a conducting material, such as metal or carbon, when an excess of electrons is induced into the circuit by a battery or generator. These excess electrons push out existing electrons from adjacent atoms and these displaced electrons push out electrons in the next atom -and so on, setting up a flow of electrons all the way down the wire. 
The flow of electricity is therefore the flow of electrons from negative to positive. Unfortunately, before the process had been completely understood, a convention had been adopted to regard the flow as being in the other direction. Thus it is important to distinguish between the convention, positive to negative, and the reality, negative to positive. 

Electricity flows from negative to positive but by convention we say that electricity flows the other way round 

Basic Electrical Theory and Ci rcuits 
ft.ifid o 
Basic Electrical Theory 2 
One way of considering how the movement of electrons becomes an electric current is to liken them to ball bearings in a tube, as shown here. If a ball bearing is pushed into the tube on the left all the balls in the tube will be moved along one and the ball bearing at the other end will fall out. 
This action is almost immediate but the actual movement of a single ball or atom is small. It does not matter how long the tube is, the result will always be the same. An electric current moves at approximately 3500 miles per second and it would take about 7 seconds for an electrical pulse to travel around the world. 
Electricity is able to flow through most metals, carbon and water. These are known as conductors. Materials which do not allow a flow of electrons, such as rubber, plastic and glass are known as insulators. 
Some substances have a conductivity sitting between that of conductors and insulators these are known as semi-conductors. The behaviour of semi-conductors can be modified by impregnating them with minute quantities of other elements by a process known as doping. Semi-conductors are used for amplification, switching and energy conversion. We will see some of this in later chapters. 

The flow of electricity is virtually instantaneous Conductors allow the flow of electricity, insulators do not 

Basic Electrical Theory and Ci rcuits 
ft+it·•­
Electrical Circuits 
The circuits discussed in this chapter are Direct Current, known as DC, meaning that the current flows in one direction only. As previously mentioned, conventional flow is from positive to negative. 
A source generating electricity such as a battery or generator must be connected to both the 'out' and 'in' side of an electrical system -it cannot push out more electrons unless the generating source is supplied with new ones. In the ball bearing analogy more ball bearings would need to be provided to keep the flow going. A circuit must therefore be closed with the returning electrons supplying the generating source with a new supply. This diagram shows the components of a simple electric circuit and a circuit diagram with the relevant electrical symbols. There is a battery, conductors (wires) an on/off switch and a light bulb (the resistance load). 

.------/---~ 
Switch 
+ 

Resistance load 
A circuit must be formed to allow the electricity to flow 

Basic Electrical Theory and Ci rcuits 

Electrical Circuits 2 
It can be seen from the electrical diagram that with the switch open as shown the electrons cannot flow back to the battery. The switch is 'open circuit' and the light bulb will not illuminate. Closing the switch (closed circuit) will complete the circuit and the electrons will flow, illuminating the bulb. A closed circuit is said to have 'continuity'. An open circuit has loss of continuity and the 


loads will not work. The build-up of electrons in a battery which causes the current to flow is called the electro-motive force (emf) and is measured in volts for which the symbol is V. Emf is the driving force in a circuit. Alternative terms include electrical pressure, E, potential difference or voltage.  +  .----­-/---~ Switch  
The flow of electrons is called the current and is measured in amps for which the symbol is A. Current is referred to in formulae with the letter I. For example, the statement 'the current is six amps' could be written as I= 6A.  Resistance load Electrical potential is measured in volts Current is measured in amps  

Basic Electrical Theory and Ci rcuits 
ft.ifid o 
Electrical Circuits 3 
In an electric circuit the conductors and electrical components resist the current flow. The resistance to electrical flow is measured in ohms. Resistance in formulae is represented by the letter R and the symbol for ohms is 0. 'The resistance is eight ohms' becomes R = 80. 
A relationship exists between current, voltage and resistance. The higher the voltage for a given resistance the higher the current, the higher the resistance for a given voltage the lower the current. This can be expressed as a formula known as Ohm's Law: 
V = IR 
The formula can also be turned around to read: 
V V 
= or R = R 
This diagram is a simple way of remembering Ohm's Law. To find current, I, cover it up and you are left with V over R to find voltage, V, cover it up and you are left with IR to find resistance, R, cover it up and you are left with V over I. 

We can ask questions using this formula Example: The current in a circuit is 2A and the resistance is 60. What is the voltage drop? Solution: V = Ix R = 2 X 6 = 12V Example: The voltage of a circuit is 1.5V and the resistance is 0.50 Solution: = V+R = 1.5 + 0.5 = 3A 
Resistance is measured in ohms 
A 

Basic Electrical Theory and Ci rcuits 
n +e+•o 
Resistors 
All materials resist the flow of electricity to some extent. Even conductors such as copper wire can be made into resistors by making the wire very thin. Resistance can also be increased by increasing the length of a wire double the length and you double the resistance. 
Most metallic resistors are also sensitive to temperature, resistance increasing as temperature increases, although carbon and non-metallic insulators behave in the opposite way. Materials that increase their resistance with an increase in temperature have a positive temperature co-efficient, so we could express that as R proportional to T. If the material has a negative temperature co-efficient, such as the carbon semi-conductor mentioned above, this could be expressed as R proportional to 1 /T, an inverse relationship. This change in resistance with temperature is used in aircraft systems for temperature measurement, and for the control of cabin heating. 
As well as the conductors in the circuit any electrical device, such as lights or a motor will create a resistance to current flow. Sometimes special resistances are placed in the circuit to alter current flow. These resistors may have a fixed or variable value. 

1 0 20 30 
The resistance of a wire depends on its thickness and length 

Basic Electrical Theory and Ci rcuits 
ft+HUo 
Series and Parallel Circuits 
Resistors in a circuit behave differently depending on how they are connected. If they are connected one after the other, in series, they behave as one big resistor and the total resistance can be found simply by adding all the little individual resistances together. 
In this diagram the total resistance is 1 + 2 + 3 = 6 ohms. Notice 

that the total resistance is greater than any individual resistance.  
You might recall that in our first example we said a 12V circuit with  
a resistance of 6 ohms would have current of 2A. We can test that  1 0  20  30  
by applying a current of 2Ato the resistances above and checking  
the voltage drop across each resistor  
for the first, one voltage drop  =  2x 1  =  2V  
for the second, the drop  =  2x2  =  4V  
for the third, the drop  =  2x3  =  6V - 
and the total  =  12V  
Resistors in series add together  

Basic Electrical Theory and Ci rcuits 
ft++·+•­
Series and Parallel Circuits 2 
Cheap party lights have the bulbs connected in series. The problem is that, although the wiring is simple, a failure of any single bulb breaks the circuit and all the lights go out. Each bulb then has to be tested in turn to find the one that failed. Series 
circuits are seldom used for aircraft electrical systems. 
A better way of wiring lights is to have a supply wire and a return wire and to connect each bulb between the wires, as shown here. This is called placing the bulbs or, to use the more general term, loads in parallel. 

Now the failure of any single bulb leaves the rest of the circuit unaffected and the failed bulb can be identified. 
In series the total resistance is always bigger than any individual resistance 

Basic Electrical Theory and Ci rcuits 
n +e+•o 
Series and Parallel Circuits 3 
Curiously, the resistance of the circuit is no longer the sum of the individual resistors, 60. Resistance in a parallel circuit is found by the formula 
or, putting it more clumsily in words, the inverse of the total resistance is the sum of the inverses of the individual resistances. 
Now we can do the maths for our circuit: 
1 1 1 
= -+-+­
1 2 3 
= 1 + 0.5 + 0.33 
R1atal 
= 1.83 
R1atal 
= 1 -;-1.83
R total 
= 0.546 ohms 

In parallel circuits the total resistance is always less than the smallest value of any individual resistance. 
For a 12V circuit with a total resistance of 0.546 ohms the current would be 
= V-;-R = 12-;-0.546 = 22A 

A parallel circuit with only two resistors can use an alternative formula derived from the first to find the total resistance 
= 
The inverse of the total resistance is the sum of the inverses of the individual resistances 
In parallel circuits the total resistance is always less than any individual resistance 

Basic Electrical Theory and Ci rcuits 

Power 
When a current flows through a resistor it generates heat, sometimes so intense that it is visible as light as in the case of our party lights. This heat is work done or power lost in the circuit. The power is measured in watts, for which the symbol is W, and can be found from the formula 
Power= IV 
that is to say the product of current and voltage. As we already know that V = IR we can replace the Vin the formula with IR to find an alternative and more common expression 
Power= 12R 
Thus if we go back to our very first example where the current was 2A and the resistance 60 we can find that the power lost in the circuit was 
= 12R 
= 22 x6 
= 24 Watts It is useful to note that, as power lost is the product of the square of the current and the resistance, it would make sense to reduce the current and increase the voltage if we wanted to reduce the power loss over a fixed resistance. This is why the overhead power lines have a very high voltage, some 500 000 V, which is reduced to a lower voltage before it reaches our houses it reduces power loss in transmission. The opposite is also true, more power is lost in high current conditions. 

More power is lost in high current conditions 

Basic Electrical Theory and Ci rcuits 
ft.iiiiWo 
Meters 
Ammeters, which indicate current, and voltmeters, which indicate emf, are very similar in operation. Both detect current flow using a coil moving in a magnetic field, the difference is that whereas ammeters are wired in series with the circuit and have a very low resistance voltmeters are wired in parallel and have a very high resistance. 
This means that the current through the voltmeter varies very little as the main circuit resistances change. 
Although the voltmeter detects current it is calibrated in volts. 

Both ammeters and voltmeters detect current 

Basic Electrical Theory and Ci rcuits 
Meters continued 
An aircraft's supply voltage is kept constant. As the loads or resistances are switched on and off the current flow will change. Ammeters are sometimes called load meters because they indicate the load in the circuit. 
Ammeters may have the needle in the centre to show current in either direction or may have the needle resting on the left to show total current flow in one direction only. These two types are known as zero centre and zero left ammeters. 

Basic Electrical Theory and Ci rcuits 
Electric Fields 

An accumulation of electrons creates a static charge on a body, static because it is not moving. The unit of charge is a coulomb, roughly equal to 6.21 x 1018 electrons. 
A static charge influences the area around it. A negative charge would attract positively charged objects and vice versa. It produces an electrical field. The SI units of electric field strength are newton's per coulomb or volts per metre. 
Electric field is a separate concept to a magnetic field (which you have already met in your study of instrumentation). The combination of the electric field with the magnetic field produces electro-magnetism. The electro-magnetic force thus produced is known as a Lorentz Force, after the Dutch scientist Hendrik Lorentz (1853 -1928). 
An aircraft picks up a static charge as it flies through, rain, clouds, snow, dust and other particles. This build up is known as precipitation static. The amount of build up depends on the nature ofthe particles, dry snow and ice particles found in cirrus clouds produce substantial build up as does flying near thunderstorms. 


The unit of electrical charge is the coulomb 


Basic Electrical Theory and Ci rcuits 

Electric Fields continued 
If left alone the static would cause interference and noise on the intercom and radios. To alleviate this problem the designers use a combination of bonding links and static wicks. The bonding ensures that all metal parts of the aircraft are connected electrically, ensuring that there is no difference in the electrical potential between one part of the aircraft and another. With no potential difference there is no emf, so no current can flow. 
The static wicks, mounted on the trailing edges, usually the control surfaces, discharge the build up to atmosphere. The wicks also need the continuity of bonding, to ensure that all parts of the aircraft can efficiently discharge their static. 
Wicks play no part in arresting or diverting lightning strikes. In fact, they must be inspected following a lightning strike to ensure that they are still effective in discharging the static. 
Static wicks should be inspected as part of the pilot's walk around. 


Basic Electrical Theory and Ci rcuits 

Electric Fields continued 
Static electricity also builds up during re-fuelling/de-fuelling as a result offriction caused by the fuel passing through the pipe. To prevent such build up the aircraft and refuelling vehicle need to be electrically bonded. To achieve bonding aircraft is connected to an earthing point on the ground, the truck is connected to earth by either a bonding strap or by conductive tyres, the hose nozzle is bonded to the refuelling point and finally the truck is bonded to the aircraft before refuelling commences. 

Static wicks should be inspected during a pilot's walk around 

Basic Electrical Theory and Ci rcuits 

Screening 
Wires carrying alternating currents will have induced electro­
Braided wire
magnetic fields around them that can interfere with other systems. 
shield 
Current carrying wires are often surrounded by a braided fine wire shield to minimise these. Unshielded wires near radios can create an 'AC hum'. 

Insulation layers 



Lesson 79 
DC Electrics and Magnetism 

AGK 79 
DC Electrics and Magnetism 
ft+IHfh!o 
Direct Current Electrics 
Everything we have considered so far applies to both Direct Current (DC) circuits where current flows in only one direction and Alternating Current (AC) circuits where it washes backwards and forwards. Now we are going to consider DC circuits in more detail. 
DC circuits have the advantage of simplicity and DC electricity has the advantage that it can be stored ready for use when required in a battery. The simplest aircraft will have only DC supplies, 


although most have both DC and AC. Direct current can be obtained from batteries from DC generators or from AC generators, through a rectifier which converts AC to DC. AC · 1/\ f\ f\ f\ f\ f\ f\ f\
J YYYYYYY\ 

generators with a DC output are commonly called alternators. \TVVVVVV\ 
DC Generator Alternator 
DC circuits are simpler than AC circuits 
DC Electrics and Magnetism 
Batteries 
Batteries store electricity to allow it to be used when required. The battery is used for starting and to provide an emergency supply in flight in case of generating system failure. They are made up of a number of cells, each ofwhich consists of two plates of different material, separated by a liquid or gel electrolyte solution. The chemical action ofthe electrolyte on the different plates erodes or changes the material allowing an electron flow from one to the other, making one terminal negatively charged and the other positive. 
The voltage provided by an individual cell depends on the material ofthe plates and the particular chemical used. 
Batteries can be made up of either primary or secondary cells. If electrical current is continually drawn from a cell the chemical action between the plates eventually ceases and the emf decays. The cell is said to be discharged or more colloquially we say the battery is flat. Primary cells cannot be recharged whereas a secondary cell can. 
In a secondary cell battery the chemical process is reversible by applying a voltage slightly higher, about 112%, of the battery voltage and producing current flow back into the battery. 
ft.iiflo 
Lead (PbO) negative plate 

Lead peroxide (Pb304) positive plate 

Batteries store electricity using chemical reactions The recharging voltage is 112% of battery voltage 
DC Electrics and Magnetism 
ft+itfto 
Primary Cells 

In a primary cell the positive plate is carbon and the ammonium Positive terminal chloride gel electrolyte is encased in a zinc shell which also acts as the negative plate. This is a normal torch battery. A primary 

Wax seal cell produces 1.5 volts. As they cannot be recharged, primary cells have a limited application on aircraft. 
Ammonium chloride electrolyte 
Zinc case acts as negative terminal
Carbon rod 
Primary cells are not rechargeable 
DC Electrics and Magnetism 
Secondary Cells 
There are three main types of secondary cell batteries used on aircraft, and these three are the types currently examined by EASA. The lead acid battery, just like a car battery, is used on smaller aircraft. Larger and modern transport aircraft are fitted with nickel cadmium (NiCad) batteries and even later aircraft use lithium ion (Li-ion) batteries. Battery technology is changing almost daily, and it is certain that EASA will add to those three types in subsequent editions oftheir learning objectives (LOs). 
Strictly speaking we should differentiate between batteries and cells. A cell is an individual unit that produces electricity. It has a low output voltage ranging between 1.2v and 4v depending on battery type. If you require a larger voltage then add more cells until you achieve the desired voltage. A collection of cells joined together in a single container is known as a battery. 
The capacity of a battery refers to how much current it can supply for what duration. This is achieved through cell plate area large plates, large capacity. Capacity is expressed in Amp Hours (Ah). A 10 Ah battery is capable of supplying 1 amp for 10 hrs or 10 amps for 1 hr or any multiple thereof, in theory at least. 
Terminals 
Casing 
Lead dioxide (positive plate) Sulphuric acid Lead (electrolyte surrounds (negative plate) the plates) 
Secondary cells are rechargeable 
Lead acid batteries give 2.2 volts per cell 
DC Electrics and Magnetism 
Lead Acid Batteries 
The traditional lead acid secondary cell has a lead peroxide positive plate and a lead negative plate with a dilute sulphuric acid electrolyte. The plates and electrolyte are contained in a plastic or hard rubber case. 
The voltage of a fully charged lead acid cell with no loads on it is 
2.2 volts. If the cell is then connected to a circuit with a load the voltage will drop to 2 volts. This is called the on load voltage. 
As a battery discharges the sulphuric acid turns both plates to lead sulphate, the strength of the acid reduces and the cell voltage drops. The only way to positively determine the state of charge of a lead acid battery is to measure the Specific Gravity (SG) of the electrolyte. This is done with an instrument called a hydrometer. 
Some fluid is drawn into the glass tube of a hydrometer and the value of SG is read off against a scale indicated by a 'float' within the tube. Fully charged it should be between 1.25 and 1.30 a low state of charge is 1 .20 to 1.24 and fully discharged is 1.17. 
If a lead acid battery is left discharged for a long period of time the sulphation of the plates makes the battery unserviceable. Lead acid batteries cannot be stored in a discharged state, they need to be maintained and regularly recharged. 
ft+iifto 


DC Electrics and Magnetism 
Nickel Cadmium (NiCad) Batteries 
Alkaline or NiCad batteries have a nickel cadmium positive plate and nickel oxide hydroxide negative plate with a potassium hydroxide gel electrolyte. This type of battery is lighter and stronger than lead acid batteries, has longer life but costs more and only produces 1.3 V off load or 1.2 Von load per cell. They do, however, produce a relatively constant voltage as they discharge. 
The advantages of NiCad batteries are: 
• 
They have a wider temperature operating range. 

• 
They hold a constant voltage until almost completely discharged. 

• 
They don't spill acid. 

• 
The charge rate is fast. 

• 
They can be stored discharged. 

• 
Sturdiness due to their metal castings. 



ft·iiifl!o 
The one real problem with NiCad batteries is that if they are recharged too quickly their temperature rises. This reduces the internal resistance which, in turn, leads to an increase in current flow. This increases the temperature again and the cycle continues until the battery electrolyte boils and the battery is damaged. This is called thermal runaway. 
Thermal runaway does also occur in lead acid batteries but it is less common and less severe. 
Too rapid a recharge can lead to thermal runaway 


DC Electrics and Magnetism 
ftiHflo 
Lithium Batteries 
There is a wide range of batteries using lithium. Two types, lithium-ion and lithium-polymer are currently used in aircraft. Lithium batteries have the advantage of high energy density meaning they have a high energy for a given weight. They can operate over a wider temperature range than Ni-Cad batteries. In the early days they could not deal with large currents but now are comparable if not better than lead acid batteries. 
However, they are more expensive, and the charging rate must be carefully controlled as they are more prone than Ni-Cad cells to thermal runaway. One runaway cell affects neighbouring cells leading to explosion and fire. The resulting fires are particulary hot. That the electrolyte is flammable adds to the hazard. In its first year the B787 suffered several problems associated with the Li-ion batteries. The image opposite shows the battery removed from JA829 J after thermal runaway. Extinguishing or containing such fires in flight is difficult. Serious incidents involving Li-ion batteries seem to be increasing and at least one aircraft has crashed with the loss of both pilots. Aircraft Li-ion batteries must be in fire resistant cases vented to atmosphere in an attempt to minimise the hazard. Clearly the more batteries the greater the hazard. 


DC Electrics and Magnetism 
fti+Eflo 
Lithium Batteries continued 
Another problem with some types of lithium batteries is damage to the casing, what appears to be a simple dent can can cause serious internal damage. 
Because of the fire risk, lithium batteries pose a threat to aircraft, not only the aircraft batteries but most portable electronic equipment carried by passengers use lithium. 
There are restrictions on the carriage of lithium ion batteries, although most phone and laptop batteries are small enough to be unrestricted. However, spare batteries must be cabin luggage as they are not permitted in the hold. 
At the time of writing, lithium-polymer is not currently used in large aircraft but is found in new self-launching gliders and drones where it's extra lightness is a bonus. 


DC Electrics and Magnetism 
ft.Mflo 
Battery health 
With most batteries performance improves with temperature but high temperature degrades their life. Heavy current flow also degrades life: if high currents are required on a regular basis use a larger capacity battery. Temperatures above 25°C seriously degrade the life of Li-ion batteries, so they must be kept cool. Battery charging circuitry must be designed to manage the above issues so that the batteries are safe. 

DC Electrics and Magnetism 
Battery Checking 
As a pilot you will not be involved in checking the charge of a battery with a hydrometer. Instead you will use the aircraft voltmeter to compare the off load and on load voltage of the battery. A typical lead acid battery has 12 cells at 2.2 Veach, giving an 'off load' voltage of around 26 V. 
A known or rated load is applied to the battery and the voltmeter monitored for about 15 seconds during which the rated voltage of the battery, typically 24 V, should be maintained. When the load is switched off you would expect the voltage to recover. 
If the battery is almost fully discharged the voltage will drop during this time under load. If one cell within a battery is dead, the voltage will either be reduced or zero. 
You should also be aware that battery performance reduces in cold weather. In extremely cold weather as their internal resistance increases their current flow reduces. Lead acid batteries are affected more than NiCads. 
Battery performance reduces in cold weather 
DC Electrics and Magnetism 
ftii!Hfl 
Charging 
The primary source of DC voltage on the aircraft comes from engine driven generators. These produce either 14 or 28 volts DC, 112% of the battery voltage. If connected to the battery the generators will cause a flow of current into the battery, reversing the chemical process and constantly recharging the cells. 
To reduce the chances of thermal runaway NiCad batteries are recharged through a constant current charging device, this prevents the current rising if the internal resistance falls. 
Sensing devices may also cut off the charging power: 
¦ 
When the battery charge is deemed satisfactory. 

¦ 
When there is a battery overheat condition. 

¦ 
In case of a battery internal short circuit. 




Charging voltage is higher than battery voltage 
DC Electrics and Magnetism 
Battery Ratings and Connections 
Aircraft battery voltages are either 12 or 24 V DC. To achieve these values a number of cells are connected in series within the battery. A battery is rated by its voltage and its capacity to provide a certain value of current for an hour. This is called its Ampere/hour, orAmp hour capacity (Ah). 
A battery might be described, for example, as 24 V and having a 50 ampere hour capacity. This means it operates at 24 V to supply 1 A for 50 hours, 2 A for 25 hours or 50 A for one hour. Connecting a number of batteries either in series or parallel affects the total voltage and capacity. 
Batteries connected in series give the same ampere hour capacity but the voltages are summed together. You might like to use 'Series Sums the voltage' to remember that. In the lower diagram in figure 2.5 the total voltage would be 72 V, and the total current would be 50 Ah. If the three batteries were all rated at 50 Ah then we would still have 50 Ah in total. 

Parallel: 24 Volts, 150 Amp Hour 

+ 

+ 

+ 
24 Volts 
24 Volts 
24 Volts 
SO Amp Hou 
SO Amp Ho 
SO Amp Ho 
Series: 72 Volts, 50 Amp Hour 
+ 
+ 
+ 
24 Volts 
24 Volts 
24 Volts 
SO Amp Ho 
SO Amp Ho 
SO Amp Hou 

Aircraft batteries are wired in parallel to increase the capacity 
DC Electrics and Magnetism 

Battery Ratings and Connections continued 
Batteries connected in parallel give the same voltage, but the Ah 
Parallel: 24 Volts, 150 Amp Hour
capacity is the total of all batteries. Thus the three 24 V, 50 Ah batteries in the top diagram in figure 2.5 would give 24 V but 150 Ah. The increased Ah rate capacity and lower voltage is preferred 

+ + 
+ 
24 Volts 24 Volts 24 Volts 
so aircraft batteries are connected in parallel. 
SO Amp Hou SO Amp Ho SO Amp Ho 
It must not be forgotten that, in the case of a loss of all generator power, the battery is the only remaining supply and it is of a limited duration. This is one reason for the design of the load distribution 

system described later. Series: 72 Volts, 50 Amp Hour 
+ 
+ 
+ 
24 Volts 24 Volts 24 Volts 
SO Amp Ho SO Amp Ho SO Amp Hou 


DC Electrics and Magnetism 
Single Pole or Dipole 
You will recall that for electricity to flow a closed circuit connecting the outlet and return to the electrical power source is required. Wooden aircraft require wires to and from the batteries to the electrical systems to complete the circuit this is called a dipole or two pole system. Metal aircraft make use of their structure for the return connection. This is a single pole, or earth return system with the negative terminal of the battery connected to earth. 
This diagram illustrates the two systems, the G symbol represents a generator wired in parallel with the batteries. Note also the symbol for a battery, which consists of a number of cells -thus far we have only seen a single cell battery in our diagrams. 
+ 

Adipole system 

Asingle pole (earth return) system 
Modern aircraft use a single pole, negative earth system 
DC Electrics and Magnetism 
Single Pole System 
The single pole system has the advantage of cutting out half the required wiring but the disadvantage that chafed wires can short to earth disabling systems and creating a fire risk. 
Busbars 
Rather than being connected to individual systems as in a car, aircraft batteries and generators are usually connected to a busbar, a heavy copper bar, and the systems or loads are in turn connected to that. Each load typically has one connection to the busbar and another to earth, this means they are wired in parallel and failure of one component should not affect the supply to another. 
An ammeter between the battery and the busbar indicates whether the battery is either discharging as it powers the busbar or being charged by the generator. An aircraft may have more than one busbar to distribute the electrical power. 
-,­
1 I 
I 
I I 
___,,J__ 
_l 
Busbars are used to distribute power 
Battery ammeters indicate charge or discharge 
DC Electrics and Magnetism 
Interpreting Ammeters 
When we look at instruments it's not simply a matter of, 'what is it reading?' We should be asking: what does this mean? Is it what I expect at this stage of flight? 
The ammeter in the previous image is a relatively large reading that we might expect immediately after engine start. 
The image opposites shows ammeters in 3 situations. 
Situation (a) indicates a small charge going into the battery, This would be expected a few minutes after start once the battery has re-charged after start and should persist throughout the flight. 
Situation (b) indicates an abnormal situation -there is no charge going into the battery. It is not possible to state the cause without further investigation. Cross reference to the voltmeter can provide further clues. 
If the volts were 28v, it would suggest that the battery has become disconnected meaning there is no access to battery in case of a generator failure. 
If the volts were low, say 26 v, it would suggest that the generator output had dropped and might well fail completely. In either case, it would be wise to consider landing as soon as practicable. 

Situation (c) indicates a heavy load on the battery-for whatever reason the generator is not functioning or is not on line. Cross reference to the voltmeter/ generator failure light should provide further clues. If you are unable to remedy the situation, you have electrics for as long as the battery will last. Land as soon as possible. 
DC Electrics and Magnetism 
Electricity and Magnetism 
A permanent magnet is surrounded by a magnetic field which can be easily seen with iron filings. The path taken by the magnetic flow -normally called the magnetic flux -is indicated by the lines of the iron filings. We can see that the flux field runs from a little way in from the ends of the magnet, not at the extremities. We already encountered this behaviour in the Instrumentation part of the course. We can produce the same effect with electricity as it flows through a conductor to create an electromagnet. The advantage of an electromagnet is that, because the current can be controlled, the strength of the magnet can also be controlled. Increasing current flow increases the magnetic field. 
PAGE 77 23 ~
en ¦ 


DC Electrics and Magnetism 
The Corkscrew Rule 
Lines of magnetic force around a wire carrying an electrical 
...... 
current will rotate in the same direction as a corkscrew which is moving in the direction of the current. This means a current carrying wire has a circular magnetic field around it. 
DC Electrics and Magnetism 
Coils 
If the wire is looped again and again to create a coil then the resulting magnetic field increases in strength and the field around the electromagnet will be like that shown here. Increasing the number and thickness of the coils increases the strength ofthe field. 
DC Electrics and Magnetism 
Core 
To further improve the electromagnet we insert a soft iron core, known as a ferromagnetic core, to concentrate the inner field. Now we have a strong controllable electromagnet. 
DC Electrics and Magnetism 
Solenoids 
As children we have all played with magnets and know that the North and South poles of a magnet are attracted to their opposite pole but repelled by a like pole. If the iron core is not central within the coil when the current to the electromagnet is switched on it will be attracted to the centre of the coil. This movement of the core allows the electromagnet to be used to move switches and valves. In this form it is called a solenoid. 
Solenoids are often used to control hydraulic and pneumatic valves and heavy duty electrical switches. The solenoid shown in this animation is being used to move a valve actuator. When current is applied to the coil windings, the core is drawn into the coil against spring pressure, moving the actuator link. When the current is cut, spring pressure returns the actuator to its original position. Solenoids can be designed to hold valves or switches either closed or open in the event of power failure. 

Spring Moving core 
Actuator link 


Solenoids operate very low torque valves and switches 


DC Electrics and Magnetism 

Dolls-Eye Indicators 
Electromagnets can also be used to control dolls-eye magnetic indicators. When current is applied to the electromagnet it attracts a permanent magnet in the indicator causing it to rotate against 
spring pressure. When off, the white side of the dolls-eye shows to attract attention. Magnetic indicators have the advantage of not being as fragile as bulbs and are typically used to indicate rotary actuator positions. 
~ 

OFF ON 
DC Electrics and Magnetism 
Relays 

Electromagnets that are used to switch other electrical circuits are called relays. Here the magnetic field ofthe electromagnet attracts the contact breaker against spring pressure to hold the circuit open. 
Relays are typically used to remotely switch low to medium current circuits, sometimes switching several at once. 
Relays can be designed to fail with the points open or closed. 




Lesson 20 
DC Motors and Generators 

AGK 20 
DC Motors and Generators 
Motors 
We have seen that passing a current through a wire creates a magnetic field that can in turn be used to make solenoids and relays move. What we have yet to discover is how to create continuous motion, in other words a motor. The purpose of a motor is to convert electrical energy into mechanical energy. Motors can be either DC, as we shall see in this chapter, or AC, which we shall meet later. 
A rotatable coil of wire with a current passing through it has a magnetic field. When it is placed in between the poles of a permanent magnet the two magnetic fields attract and repel each other to create torque, a turning force on the wire. This process is known as electromagnetic induction. The inductance and voltage in a coil depend upon the thickness of the wire, the number of turns in the wire, and the strength of the magnetic field, all of which we shall soon examine in greater depth. 
ft+IFfdo 
A current passed through a wire in a magnetic field creates a force 

A conductor is positioned in a magnetic field perpendicular to the magnetic field lines. If a current is passed through this conductor: 
• a force will be exerted on the conductor. 
• the intensity of the magnetic field will decrease . 
• there will be no effect unless the conductor is moved. 
• the current will increase. 
DC Motors and Generators 
Fleming's Left Hand Rule 
The direction in which the coil moves is dependent on its position within the magnetic field and the direction of the current flow through the loop. An easy way to find the direction in which the loop moves is to apply "Fleming's left hand rule". 
However, another force, called a Lorentz force, is also produced, which is perpendicular to the current and perpendicular to the magnetic field. The direction of the force is demonstrated by Fleming's right hand rule, which is explained later in the chapter. 
John Fleming was an English physicist who developed many practical methods of determining the effects of magnetic fields. Fleming's Left Hand Rule says, using the First finger of the left hand to point in the direction of the magnetic Field (North to South) and mlddle finger to point in the direction ofthe current flow (I) through the loop, the thuMb will point in the direction the of Motion of the coil. 
ft+iiffo 
Fleming's left hand rule Ml ddle finger points in direction of current flow (I) 
First finger points in direction of magnetic Field 
ThuMb points in directionof Motion 


n,,,._DC Motors and Generators 
Commutators 
Left to its own devices the coil would end up stationary and at right 
Carbon
angles to the magnetic field. The trick is to cut the current just 
Brush 
before it reaches this position and, as it continues to rotate past it, then supply current again for another half rotation in the same direction so the rotation continues. The device that does this is called a commutator. 
A commutator is a conductive ring in two pieces. Electrical contact is made with it through brushes, small blocks of solid carbon held against the commutator by springs. With the commutator in the position shown in here the current will flow through the coil (correctly called an armature) causing it to rotate. As it reaches the 90° position the brushes are in the gap between the commutator segments, current is cut but angular momentum keeps the armature turning to make the contact again. 
The maximum torque or twisting moment is found where the coil lies parallel with the magnetic field. 
In a motor the armature carries the current 
DC Motors and Generators 
Complete Motors 
Complete motors use many turns of wire and multi segment commutators so the current is always flowing through the wires in the maximum torque position. 
Current flow 
DC Motors and Generators 
ft.iiMo 
Field Coils 
Field coils are wound round the iron cores to create electromagnets rather than use weaker and uncontrollable permanent magnets. 
The torque developed by a motor is linked directly to the Lorentz force produced. Lorentz force is governed by the strength of the magnetic field around the conductor, the current flow in the the conductor and the length of the conductor within the field. In practical terms the length is increased by having many windings. 
The rotating part of a motor or generator is referred to as the 'rotor' and the static part as the 'stator'. 

The field coils produce the magnetic field 
DC Motors and Generators 
Field Windings Series Wound Motors 
Careful design can create motors for different purposes. To create a motor with high starting torque we would need high field strength initially. It makes sense, then, to put the field coils in series with the armature. Series wound motors need heavy field wiring to take the high currents. 
A disadvantage is that without anything to slow them down series wound motors can easily over-speed. Typically they are used as engine starter motors and for operation of retractable flaps and slats, systems requiring high initial torque. 
ft.Mfo 

Series field coil 
Series wound motor Armature 

• 
All of the input flows through the field windings. 

• 
Afew turns of thick wire are used. 

• 
High starting current possible. 

• 
High starting torque. 

• 
Speed reduces as mechanical load increases. 


Series wound DC motors, the most common, have high starting torque 
DC Motors and Generators 
ft+Hilo 
Shunt Wound Motors 
Parallel or shunt wound field windings have the advantage that the current flow through them is low and constant thus creating a constant speed motor, a disadvantage is that they produce low torque and cannot take much mechanical load on start-up. Shunt wound motors are used to drive cooling fans and a device we shall meet later, a rotary inverter. 


DC Motors and Generators 
Compound Wound Motors 
The obvious compromise between the two is to make a motor with both shunt and series wound field wires to try to gain the advantages of both types. The compound wound motor uses shunt windings to create 60% to 70% of the magnetic field and series windings for the rest. Compound wound motors are ideal for applications that require a wide range of torques. 
Split Field Motors 
Motors can be made to run in both directions by having two sets of field coils, one wound clockwise and one anti-clockwise. Switching the current from one to the other reverses the polarity of the field and thus the direction ofthe motor. These are called split field motors. 
ft.i=Hfo 


Compound wound DC motors offer a wide range of torques Split field DC motors are reversible 
DC Motors and Generators 
Problems with motors 
Electric motors are extremely reliable machines however a couple of known faults exist. 
Rotor bearings are the weakness of motors their failure can lead to seizure and/or mechanical breakup. In addition, if a motor were to seize, the lack of back emf would result in very high current flow which presents a fire hazard. 
As mentioned earlier, series wound motors must have a load on them or they they will over speed. In theory they would accelerate to an infinitely high speed. In practice they disintegrate before they get there, once again presenting a fire risk. 
ft.Mfo 


DC Motors and Generators 

Actuators 
Whilst solenoid actuators are ideal for low torque operations 
electric motors are the better choice to drive high torque actuators. Electrical actuators fall into two categories: rotary and linear actuators. 
Rotary Actuators 
Rotary actuators are small reversible electric motors which typically operate through 350°. Limit switches at each end of travel turn the motor off and change the direction ofthe field ready for the motor to drive the actuator back on it next selection. They are powered by series wound motors for the torque and are used to open fuel cocks and butterfly type valves. 


Rotary actuators use reversible series wound DC motors Limit switches open to remove power to the actuators 
DC Motors and Generators 
Linear Actuators 
Linear actuators use a DC motor turning a screw jack to give precise control over the actuator position. Solenoid operated brake systems avoid over-run when power is turned off, and friction clutches are fitted to protect against mechanical overload. Limit switches cut power to the actuator motor when the limit of travel is reached. Linear actuators may also be referred to as inching controls. 
Linear actuators are reversible DC motors with series field windings for instantaneous torque. A typical application for inching controls would be as electrical trim or electrical flap actuators. 
Electric or hydraulic trimming Jack 
Linear actuators are called inching controls Linear actuators use series wound reversible DC motors 
DC Motors and Generators 
Generators 
So far we have seen that if we pass a current through a wire in a magnetic field we get movement. The reverse is also true ifwe move a wire through a magnetic field a voltage is induced in the wire. 
This means that ifwe turn a motor armature with a drive from an engine we generate a voltage. A generator, then, is a motor working backwards a motor is a generator working backwards. 

t t t 
I I
t 
I
I 
I
I
t I
I
I 
I
I 
I
Current I I I I Motion
I I 
I
.. I I I I 
.. 

Field 
A voltage is induced only if the wire moves in the magnetic field 
DC Motors and Generators 
Fleming's Right Hand Rule 
The relationship between the motion, the field and the induced current in a generator is described by Fleming's right hand rule the relationship for motors is Fleming's left hand rule. Remember to use the right hand for generighters. 
The size of the induced voltage depends on the strength of the magnetic field, the number of turns of wire and the rate at which the lines of magnetic flux are cut. The same controlling factors make the construction of a simple generator just like a simple motor. 
Fleming's right hand rule 
ThuM b points in direction of M otion of conductor relative to field 
First finger points in direction of magnetic Field 
Mlddle finger points in direction of current flow (I) from induced EMF 
Flemings right hand rule applies to generators 
DC Motors and Generators 
Magnets 
Some of the simplest generators rely only on permanent magnets for the field these have the advantage that the field is present as the generator starts to turn. This method can only be used for small, low output devices as the magnetic field is small. If electromagnets are used for the field an excitation current can be drawn from other sources such as the battery these are separately excited systems. 
More commonly the generator relies on residual magnetism in the iron core to provide a small magnetic field on start up. Once current begins to be generated this can be directed through the field coils to increase the output. This is a self-excited system. Self-excited generators sometimes lose their residual magnetism because of excess heat, shocks or inadvertent reversal of the excitation current. Residual magnetism can be restored by briefly passing a current through the field coils in the correct direction. This is called field flashing. 
Field coils Armature 
Field coils 
Brush 
Brush 
Multi segment commutator 
Separately excited generators use an external power source for the field windings 
Self excited generators use their own output to power the field windings 
DC Motors and Generators 
The Magnetic Field and Voltage Relationship 

The aim in designing a generator should be to produce one that Armature
Field coils 
has a relatively constant output voltage irrespective of the output current and changes in drive speed. The current through the field 
Field coils 
coils is a good starting point as it directly influences the strength of the magnetic field. If the field is strong the induced emf is high and the output voltage high. If the field is weak the output voltage is low. Ideally we need a constant current to the field coils. 
Brush 
Brush 
Multi segment 
commutator 
Field flashing restores lost magnetism 
DC Motors and Generators 
Parallel Wound Generators 
Putting the field coils in parallel with the output voltage helps initially as large variations in the output current as systems are turned on and off will have only a small effect on the current through the many fine windings of the field coils. 
Resistance changes in the main circuit will still, however, have a discernible effect. As more electrical items, wired in parallel, are turned on, more 'paths' are opened for the current to flow through and the main circuit resistance decreases. If the main circuit resistance decreases, the output current or load in the main circuit will increase and the current through the shunt field coils decreases. This will, in turn, decrease the output voltage. 
The parallel wound generator is sometimes referred to as a shunt wound generator. 

0 IL (Load CurrentOutput) 100% 
The voltage of shunt wound generators decreases as more services are switched on 

DC Motors and Generators 
Series Wound Generators 
An alternative system places the field coils in series with the electrical loads. As the field windings now have to take the full output current they must be made of fewer turns of heavier wire. 
In a series wound generator an increase in the main circuit current also increases the field current. Now we have the reverse of the parallel wound system, as load increases field current increases and output voltage also increases. 
The voltage of series wound generators is hard to control and they are not used in aircraft but, as with motors, the series wound system can be mixed with the shunt wound to create a compound wound system. 
Output voltage 

0 IL (Load CurrentOutput) 100% 
The voltage of series wound generators increases 
DC Motors and Generators 
Compound Wound Generators 
The combination or compound wound system combines the characteristics of both the series wound and parallel wound coils to produce a steadier output voltage with load. The fall in output voltage ofthe parallel coil generator as load increases is balanced by the increased voltage of the series wound generator as load increases. The series windings carry a large current so they are few and made of heavy wire the parallel (shunt) windings consist of more windings ofthinner wire. The generators fitted to aircraft are either compound or shunt wound. 
Although the generator output voltage is fairly stable it is still not quite constant enough to use. The next thing to consider is fine control of voltage voltage regulation. 
Shunt field coil 
Output voltage 
0 IL (Load CurrentOutput) 100% 
Combination wound generators are used to provide constant voltage with changing load 
DC Motors and Generators 
Carbon Pile Regulators 
The working part of a carbon pile regulator is a pile of carbon discs whose resistance varies with compression. When compressed the carbon discs make better electrical contact and resistance is decreased. 
At high RPM or low load conditions increasing voltage across the voltage coil increases the pull against a spring which reduces pressure in the carbon pile. This reduced pressure causes the resistance of the pile to increase thus lowering the current in the shunt field which accordingly reduces the output voltage. 
As the resistance of carbon decreases with temperature, it also needs to be cooled this is accomplished by enclosing it in a finned ceramic tube which acts as a heat sink. 
Notice that the regulator is wired in series with the field coils and that, because the regulator acts to reduce the voltage, failure of the regulator would cause the output voltage to increase. 



• 
Generator voltage increases. 

• 
Voltage coil becomes more powerful. 

• 
Carbon pile compression decreased. 

• 
Resistance increased. 

• 
Excitation current decreased. 

• 
Generator voltage decreased. 


As the pile is compressed resistance decreases The regulator is in series with the shunt field coil 
DC Motors and Generators 
Vibrating Contact Regulators 
An alternative form of voltage regulator for low current systems on light aircraft is a vibrating contact regulator. As the generator voltage increases the voltage coil causes the points to open, decreasing the field current, decreasing the output voltage and allowing the points to close. The points will open and close from 50 to 200 times a second. 
Vibrating contact regulators are unsuitable for high output systems as the points might fuse together with the heat generated. Some vibrating contact systems have a current regulator combined with the voltage regulator so that either high current or high voltage will open the points. When either the current regulator or voltage regulators breaker points are open the other regulator will be disarmed. 
Once again the regulator is wired in series with the field coils and, because the regulator acts to reduce the voltage, failure of the regulator would cause the output voltage to increase. 
Modern aircraft with DC generators are fitted with electronic voltage regulators. Generators are rated by supply voltage and current capacity. 


Vibrating contact regulators might be used in light aircraft 
Shunt field coil 

• 
Generator voltage increases. 

• 
Voltage coil becomes more powerful. 

• 
Points open. 

• 
Resistance increased. 

• 
Exciting current decreased. 

• 
Generator voltage decreased. 

• 
Points close. 




DC Motors and Generators 

Parallel Operation and DC Load Sharing 
If two or more generators are installed, perhaps on a twin-engined aircraft, and the voltages are nearly the same the output can be fed to a busbar and then out to the individual components. The generators are then operating in parallel. 
Once connected to the busbar the individual generators must have balanced output voltages or one will do more work than the other. To achieve this load sharing an extra equalising circuit is added between the return lines to the generators. 
The equalising circuit shown here adds two special coils called the equaliser coils which are wired in series with each of the voltage coils and two calibrated resistors. The resistors can be fitted in the negative or, with slight variation, to the positive side ofthe circuit. The equalising circuits are then called negative and positive lead paralleling respectively. The resistors may be special resistors or a series winding of the generator. 
DC generator's output voltage is balanced to balance loads 
DC Motors and Generators 
Load Shedding 
The equalising circuit depends upon the voltage drop across the calibrated resistors. If all generators are supplying the same current the voltage drop across each resistor is the same. If the current is different from either generator, there will be a greater voltage drop across the resistor of the generator supplying the higher current. 
If number 1 generator is taking more load than number 2, the return side of number 1 generator will be at a lower potential than the return side of number 2, leading to a current flow through the equalising circuit from 2 to 1. This acts on the voltage regulators to reduce the voltage of number 1 generator and increase the voltage of number 2 by varying the excitation currents to the field coils restoring the balance. In a steady state no current will flow in the equalising circuit. 
If the equalising circuit were to fail then any generator with a higher output voltage would supply significantly more current. Where multiple generators are installed each generator would have its own ammeter to allow the pilot to monitor correct operation of the equalising circuit. 
If either generator were to fail it should be isolated and non­essential electrical services turned off to reduce the load on the remaining generator. This is called load shedding. 



The equalising circuit acts on the voltage regulators Load shedding is required if a generator fails 
DC Motors and Generators 
Generator and Busbar Protection 
None of the regulating systems discussed so far will protect the generator or the busbar from faults in the system. Each aircraft generator will have an ammeter installed indicating output current in amps. Fluctuating output current and a flickering generator warning light can indicate imminent generator failure. Automatic protection is provided by relays and control breakers that disconnect the generator from the busbar, remove the supply to the generator field coils and provide a fault indication to the pilot. 
Feeder Fault 
A feeder fault to the busbar, that is to say a generator supply fault, can result from a flux imbalance between the voltage coil and the series winding coils. Protection systems would: 
¦ 
Open the generator field current relay. 

¦ 
Open the main relay of the generator breaker. 

¦ 
Open the balance circuit of paralleled generators. 

¦ 
Operate a generator OFF line indicator light. 




DC Motors and Generators 
Reverse Current Protection 
In a two generator system, a differential relay is fitted which ensures that the voltages are almost equal before the generators are paralleled. Once paralleled, any faults will remove one of the generators from the busbar to prevent it being driven as a motor against the direction of the engine. Protection against a reverse flow of current from the battery through the busbar to the generator is also provided. 
The first step to avoiding this is to maintain the generator voltage at a higher level than the battery voltage for 24 V batteries the generator output voltage would be maintained at 28 V. 
The second step is to consider what would occur if the generator output voltage became lower than the battery voltage. Simply put, the battery would feed to generator which would start to act like a motor, rapidly draining the battery. To prevent this we include a reverse current relay to disconnect the generator when either a reverse current flow is detected or the generator output become less than 27 volts. This often incorporates an additional switch to allow the generator to be manually disconnected from the busbar and is referred to as the generator breaker or cut-out. 

Generator voltage is higher than battery voltage 
DC Motors and Generators 
Reverse Current Protection continued 
Generator breaker contacts are held open by spring tension when the generator is off line and closed by a solenoid when the switch is made and generator output is adequate, generally at half a volt over battery voltage. A generator warning light indicates the generator cut-out is open. 
A reverse current circuit breaker (RCCB) may operate to disconnect the generator if the reverse current relay fails. 
If a zero centred ammeter is fitted to show if the battery is charging or discharging then generator failure would be indicated by the ammeter indicating a discharge with the generator warning light on. If a voltmeter calibrated in volts is used it will show the voltage of the electrical system both before the cut-out closes as, for instance, 28 V and after the cut-out closes when it will show battery voltage of 23 V or 24 V. 

DC Motors and Generators 
Thermal Trips 
When working hard the generators get very hot. In flight the generators are normally cooled with ram air. If the cooling is insufficient there may be thermal trips fitted which turn off the field current. If the generator is taken off line because ofoverheating it should be allowed to cool for a while before bringing it back on line. 

Starter Generators 
Some aircraft are designed to take advantage of the fact that the construction of a DC motor and generator are the same by using a single machine to function in both roles. 
Initially the machine works as an engine starter motor. Once the engine is running the machine is selected to operate as a generator. Using the same component for both tasks reduces weight. 
Starter generators are only practical on relatively small engines as the energy required to start an engine is related to its size. Small turbine engines may be able to use the battery for a very limited number of start attempts however, large turbine engines require a greater power source, normally a pneumatic starter powered from the APU or an external air trolley. 


Lesson 27 
DC Power Distribution and Circuit Protection 
AGK 27 

DC Power Distribution and Circuit Protection 
ft.ihtrl o 
DC Power Distribution 
Grouping services on busbars makes load shedding a relatively simple operation. Aircraft systems are classified as vital services, essential services or non-essential services. Each group is powered from separate busbars so that power to groups of electrical services can be simply controlled. 
¦ 
Vital Services are needed when all main power is lost 

¦ 
Essential Services are needed for continued safe flight in an emergency 

¦ 
Non-Essential Services can be shed in an emergency 



~ GCB Essential AC Busbar Non essential AC Busbar 
Air cooled generators 



DC Power Distribution and Circuit Protection 
ft+i.+l o 
DC Power Distribution 
The vital services are powered from the battery busbar, this is also called the "Hot Busbar" or "Direct Busbar". This busbar is directly connected to the battery and is always powered. 
Aircraft fitted with DC generators may require some AC power for instruments and avionics. The AC supply is obtained from an inverter, a device that turns DC to AC. 
The generators are connected to their busbars via the Generator Control Breakers (GCB). The N°1 and 2 DC busbars can be connected together by operation of the Bus Tie Breaker (BTB) either for parallel operation or to power the whole system from one generator. The BTB is occasionally referred to as the changeover relay. 
Provision is made on some aircraft for external ground power to feed the busbars. Closing the BTB with ground power supplied would allow all the services to be powered on the ground. Bringing an engine generator on line automatically trips the external power relay. This diagram shows a typical DC power distribution system for an aircraft. 
Voltmeters and ammeters are fitted so that the electrical system can be monitored. Warning lights indicate if a generator is off line or a busbar is not powered. 

~ GCB Essential AC Busbar Non essential AC Busbar 
Air cooled generators 



DC Power Distribution and Circuit Protection 
ft+IH+lo 
Circuit and Component Protection 
Fuses and circuit breakers are connected in series with aircraft 
Supply in 
services to prevent excessive current damaging delicate components and reduce the risk offire from overheating. In general, in the event of a ruptured fuse, it may be replaced once with one ofthe same rating, or less. In the event of a tripped circuit breaker it may be reset once only in flight. Both fuses and 

circuit breakers are rated in amps, for current flow protection. Circuit Breakers 
Supply in 
Circuit breakers should be fitted as close as possible to the power source and may be colour coded: 
Red Circuit breakers which may need to be manually reset in flight 

or Circuit breakers which can be pulled to isolate a service 
~ 
Fuses can be replaced once only and circuit breakers reset once 

DC Power Distribution and Circuit Protection 
Circuit and Component Protection continued Aircraft circuit breakers are of a type known as 'trip free'. This Supply in 
CB closed (normal operation)
means that the circuit breaker cannot be held in to re-make the circuit with the malfunction still present. Non-trip free circuit breakers, which are not permitted in aircraft, can be held in to re­make the circuit. Neither can be reset until the fault is cleared. 
Some circuits do not have flight deck switches. Occasionally, it might be necessary to isolate or reset a circuit by pulling the circuit breakers provided it is part of a recognised procedure. 
Supply in 
CB 'popped' open 
Trip free circuit breakers cannot be held in to make a faulty circuit 

DC Power Distribution and Circuit Protection 
ft.iff+l o 
Bi-Metallic (Thermal) Circuit Breakers 
These circuit breakers are operated by a bi-metallic strip, two strips of metal bonded together. The heating effect of the current causes the metals to expand by different amounts and this causes the strip to bend. Excessive current will bend the strip so much that a latch is moved to trip the circuit breaker and literally break the circuit. 
Magnetic Circuit Breakers 
A possible disadvantage of bi-metallic circuit breakers is that the heating effect takes time. Magnetic circuit breakers provide a quicker response. Similar to the thermal circuit breakers, magnetic circuit breakers trip a mechanical latch. Magnetic breakers can also be used to sense direction of current so may be used as reverse flow breakers. 
Fuses 
Most fuses are made of a waisted strip of zinc alloy. The heating effect of excessive current causes the alloy to melt and break the circuit. An extra 10% of fuses must be carried in flight as spares. 
Slow Blow Fuses or Current Limiters are made of a waisted strip of tinned copper. This has a high melting point, which means that it will stay intact in the event of a high transient overload but melt and break the circuit if there is a continuous overload. 

Rating 
Fuses are rated in amps: a fuse rated at 10 amps should be able to carry a continuous load of 10 amps without failure. In practice current flow fluctuates and fuses suffer from fatigue so a fuse of a higher value may be used. For example, if a circuit has an expected flow of 10 amps then a 15 amp fuse would be reasonable. 
Risks 
One of the reasons for a high current is a short circuit, which means a part or all of the circuit has been by-passed reducing the overall resistance of the circuit. If you consider Ohms law, V = IR it is clear that if the resistance goes down then current flow increases creating heat which may lead to fire. Then look from a power perspective Watts = IV. If current goes up then power consumed by the circuit goes up. A short circuit could easily overload the generator causing generator failure/fire. 
In case you are wondering about the voltage, it remains constant by the action ofthe voltage regulator. However, switching of high loads may lead to transient spikes in voltage while the regulators attempt to regain control. Most circuit breakers and fuses can cope with transient changes provided they are not excessive. 
DC Power Distribution and Circuit Protection 
ft+M+lo 
Risks continued 
Circuit breakers and fuses are part of the safety system, respect what they tell you: the current flow was excessive! You are permitted one attempt to reset a circuit breaker or replace a fuse. When replacing a fuse it is important to use a fuse of the correct rating otherwise there is a fire risk. 
Warning Lights 
On most modern aircraft lights and indicators are designed to be off when the system is operating normally. This is sometimes referred to as a 'black panel' as lights only come on if the unusual happens. Lights are generally, but unfortunately not exclusively, colour coded as shown opposite. 
Filaments of the bulbs are tested by pushing in on the light lenses or by a master test switch to show a complete panel of lights. 
Colour 
Meaning 
Warning. Fire Warnings, Engine failure(s) etc 

AMBER 
Caution. Oil pressure, or 
Overboost, Generator fail etc
YELLOW 

Advisory. Gear Down etc Transit. Fuel valve etc 
Information. Ground Power
WHITE 
connected etc 
An extra 10% of fuses must be carried as spares 

DC Power Distribution and Circuit Protection 
ft+H+lo 
Switches 
The design philosophy for switches on modern aircraft is shown in this illustration. A hand moved from bottom rear to top rear in the flight deck should be switching on. Older types, and many helicopters, do not follow that same standard. 
Switches of various types are used in the aircraft industry. Mechanical switches may be of the toggle, rocker, rotary, or push and pull type. We shall also look at thermo, time and proximity switches a little further on. 


Switches are ON when UP except in helicopters 

DC Power Distribution and Circuit Protection 
ft.f:h+lo 
Switch Types 
Switches may be further categorised by the number of poles number of positions whether they are permanent or momentary contacts and whether they are Normally Open (NO) or Normally 
~0--~ 0--7
------if(

Closed (NC). Have a look at the various configurations in this 0--~0-­illustration, which starts with the simplest, a Single Pole, Single 
Single pole single Single pole double Double pole single
Throw (SPST). The double pole symbols include a dotted line 
throw switch throw switch throw switch 
between the two poles this is to denote that the poles are 
t 
physically in the same switch unit, although they may well be 
----o--(o= 
I
operating in different circuits. 
---0 0----~ 
~ 

Double pole double Push switch Push switch .... throw switch _l normally open normally closed 
DC Power Distribution and Circuit Protection 
ft+M+lo 
Toggle and Momentary Switches 
Toggle switches are the most basic, and probably the most familiar, of them all. The panel shown here has a variety of switches in it. We need not concern ourselves yet with the function of this panel -we will meet it in a later chapter. The switch marked GALLEY is a simple toggle switch, which would stay 'latched' in either position once moved there. The switch to the left of that, marked BAT is another toggle switch, but this time guarded to prevent inadvertent operation. Most guarded switches like this will revert to the design default position when the guard is closed, whether that is OFF, ON or any other available selection. Some toggle switches incorporate a second latch, requiring the actual switch to be pulled out slightly before operating, again to prevent accidental operation. 


DC Power Distribution and Circuit Protection 
Toggle and Momentary Switches continued 
Guarded switches are often colour coded. A black guard shows that the switch can be moved from one position to the other freely. A red guard warns the pilot that once operated the action cannot be reversed. Generator disconnect switches discussed later have red guards. 
To the right of the GALLEY switch is a push switch marked RESID VOLTS. This is a type known as a 'momentary' switch, which needs to be held in against spring pressure to complete -or indeed break -a circuit. 
A red guarded switch means that once operated the action cannot be undone 

DC Power Distribution and Circuit Protection 
Switchlights, Rocker and Rotary Switches 

Many modern aircraft use switch lights, which are push switches with integral lights to show the selection made. These are very common on autopilot control panels, for example. 
Rocker switches are very common in cars, but rather less so in aviation. They combine the function of a toggle and a push/pull switch. They can also be illuminated from within to indicate the status of the switch, as you can see in this image. 
Another type of switch is the rotary switch, used where a toggle switch would not have enough positions available. Two rotary switches are depicted in the illustration on the previous page, above the bottom row of switches that we have already met. Slightly different rotary switches are also to be found bottom right in the image here. 


DC Power Distribution and Circuit Protection 

····-· --····-··--, ..-········,, .··-····--··-.····­
Switches 
Microswitches are used extensively in aircraft. An actuating rod into the switch moves contacts to make or break a circuit. They might be used, for example, to show the status of a panel or door. They are often used on the undercarriage legs to show 'Weight On Wheels' (WOW) status. A schematic of an NC microswitch is shown in this illustration. 
A proximity switch serves a similar function to a microswitch, indicating the position of an item -for example an undercarriage leg. Rather than physical contact, the proximity switch works by the object interrupting a magnetic field. This can be by pulling together two blade-like contacts, known as a 'reed switch' or by solid state (no moving parts) where an inductance loop is influenced by a ferrous component on the other half of the item being monitored. 
Thermo switches, as the name implies, work on temperature. A change in temperature will result in a change of the switch position. These switches are not normally operated by the crew, as they often serve to automatically isolate an overheated component, in much the same way as a circuit breaker. 
Time switches are those that react to a time that has been programmed into them -think central heating controller and you have it. The time used could be the actual time, or perhaps an 
Actuating rod 
Moving contact l I Fixed contact 

Normally closed (NC)Common (C) 



Lesson 22 
AC Electricity 


AGK 22 
AC Electricity 
AC Electricity 
Whilst DC electricity is a constant flow of electrons in one direction along a wire, AC electricity is produced when electrons move backwards and forwards along a wire. It could be produced by an AC Generator or via a DC circuit which is converted to AC by an inverter. 
This diagram shows how AC voltage varies with time, the current flow in an AC system is constantly changing both in magnitude and polarity. The frequency of an AC current is expressed as the number of complete cycles a second. One cycle a second is a Hertz (Hz), and three full cycles are shown here. 
As voltage fluctuates evenly between peak positive and peak negative the average voltage is clearly zero. This tells us nothing of value as the peak voltages could be very high or very low and still the average voltage would be zero. To get around this problem of description the voltages are squared to make them positive, then averaged, then the square root is taken to provide the Root Mean Square (RMS) voltage, a more meaningful indication. The heating effect ofthe RMS AC voltage is the same as the equivalent DC voltage. The RMS voltage is, because of the maths of a sine wave, 0.707 times the peak voltage. UK mains electricity is 240 volts RMS, so the peak voltage is: 
240 -a-0.707 = 340 volts. 
ft.ihi·-l o 
+150 V 

Voltage 00 

-150 V 
AC electricity comes from alternators 
RMS voltage is 0.707 times peak voltage and has the same heating effect as the equivalent in DC 
AC Electricity 
AC Generation 
You can see here a simple AC generator and its output with a DC generator for comparison. In each case the wire loop rotating in the magnetic field, the rotor, has a voltage induced in it. In the DC generator the segmented commutator ensures that the pulses of current flowing out to the circuit are of the same polarity (positive or negative). In the AC generator the commutator is replaced by slip rings which continuously collect the current induced in the loop. The current changes from positive to negative as the sides of the wire loop pass the North and South poles of the stationary electro-magnet, the stator. In practice there are many loops of wire wound on the rotor to increase the alternator efficiency. 
It is equally acceptable, and more common in aircraft, to feed a low DC current via brushes and slip rings to the rotating coil (the rotor), thus producing a rotating magnetic field which induces AC electricity in the stationary coils (the stator). An AC generator that has a built in rectifier rendering the output DC is known as an alternator. Most cars have alternators. An AC generator producing just one output is known as a single phase generator, though there are not many of these. Aircraft can use single phase, three phase or alternators. We shall meet alternators next followed by three phase. 
ft+i.i+lo 

· 1/\ f\ f\ f\ f\ f\ f\ f\
J YYYYYYY\ 
\TVVVVVV\ 
DC Generator Alternator 
The rotor rotates, the stator is fixed 
AC Electricity 
Alternators 
AC generators are more efficient than DC generators, so they are sometimes combined with an internal rectifier and used to power DC systems. They are more efficient because they produce voltage at a lower RPM than a DC generator they have a better power to weight ratio and, because they use a slip ring rather than the split ring commutators we met in the last lesson, they produce virtually no arcing and sparking. They therefore produce much less interference in the form of noise through radio and intercom circuits, and do not wear out as quickly, making for reduced maintenance costs. Generators like this are called alternators, and are extensively used in light aircraft and helicopters, as well as being almost universal now in cars. 
ft.IH~f o 

Which of these statements is correct? 
• The frequency of an AC current is expressed as the number of complete cycles a minute, one cycle per 
minute is a Hertz (Hz) 
• The voltage of an AC current is expressed as the number of complete cycles a second, one cycle a 
second is a Hertz (Hz) 
• The frequency of an AC current is expressed as the number of complete cycles a second, one cycle a 
second is a Hertz (Hz) 
• The frequency of an AC current is expressed as the number of half cycles a second, one half cycle a second 
is a Hertz (Hz) 
AC Electricity 
Three Phase Output 
Larger aircraft use AC generators that produce an AC output. These generators have three outputs, called a three phase supply. 
Stator

This animation shows a three phase AC generator with a coil -0 permanent magnet rotating between three sets of induction coils, so effectively three AC generators in one. As the rotor end passes a stator coil, the magnetic field of the rotor moves closer to, then away from, the stator. This changing magnetic field induces an AC current in the stator. The stator pairs are at 120° from each other, thus producing three AC supplies which are 120° out of phase, each phase being tapped from a pair of stator coil windings. 
The animation shows a simple brush less three phase AC generator, it lacks a method to control output voltage. The three phase output is shown in the illustration below. Electrical services can use one, two or three phases at once. 
AC Electricity 
Phase 
In electrical terms, phase has two meanings depending on context. 
The first is the definition of the position at a point in time on a waveform. For example, at a given time, what is the phase angle and what is the amplitude. 
The second is an expression of relative displacement between waves having the same frequency. In three phase circuits there are 120 degrees of phase difference between each phase. This makes sense as 360 degrees divided by 3 equals 120 degrees. 
ft+++~,­

Phase Shift 
Phase shift occurs when the phase angle of a wave is displaced from its original position. It doesn't change the frequency it is more of a shift in position. 
We will see more of phase relationships when we consider AC capacitors and inductors. 
AC Electricity 
Calculating the Frequency 
Aircraft use a frequency of400 Hz, as the motors and generators using or producing those frequencies are considerably smaller and lighter than domestic devices that use 50 or 60 Hz. 
The frequency of the induced AC current will be the rate of revolution of the rotor but divided by 60, as frequency is expressed as cycles a second and rate of revolution is Revolutions Per Minute (RPM). If two magnets are used, two pole pairs, the frequency is doubled, if three are used it is tripled. 
Putting this concept into a formula, we get: 
RPM x Number of pole pairs
Frequency(Hz) = 
60 
ft+M+lo 

Example: An AC generator has four pole pairs at 6000 RPM. What will the frequency be? Solution: 
RPM x Number of pole pairs 
Frequency (Hz) = 60 
6000 X 4
Frequency (Hz) = 
60 = 400 Hz 
Frequency is RPM times pole pairs divided by 60 

AC Electricity 
Self-Excited Brushless AC Generators 
The permanent magnet rotor of the AC generator in the animation on page 4 is usually replaced by a DC powered electro-magnet. Varying the excitation current through the field windings of the electro-magnet varies alternator output voltage. 
The DC supply for the field windings can come from either the battery (separately excited), or from the generator itself, via a rectifier (self-excited). If the excitation current comes from the battery then it follows that a flat battery will result in the generator not operating. This makes the second format, self-exciting, the most common. 
This diagram shows the components of a brushless self-excited AC generator. The voltage regulator controls the DC current to the exciter, which in turn controls the AC current induced. The AC is rectified to DC to provide a controlled excitation current in the generator field coils. The permanent magnets on the stator induce a small amount ofAC in the rotor coils as the generator first starts to turn, and this makes the generator self-starting. 
A typical three phase aircraft AC supply will run at 115 V RMS. 
Generator
DC input 
Control Unit
~--­
I 

GCU 


Field breaker relay 
Rectifier on shaft AC DC rotating field 



AC Electricity 
Advantages of AC Generators 
The main difference in construction between the DC generator and the AC generator is that, in an AC generator, the windings in which the output current is induced, the armature, are on the stator with the field windings on the rotor. With a DC generator the opposite is the case, the field windings are on the stator and the induction windings of the armature are on the rotor. 
AC generating systems have several advantages over DC systems: 
¦ 
They are more flexible in use. 

¦ 
They are lighter than DC generators. 

¦ 
They have a better power to weight ratio. 

¦ 
It is easy to change the voltage with transformers. 

¦ 
It is easy to convert AC into DC, if required. 

¦ 
They are brushless, so require less maintenance. 

¦ 
They produce a voltage at a lower RPM than DC generators. 


ft.i=hf+lo 

Because of this most piston engined aircraft use alternators where all, or nearly all, of the 14V AC output is converted to DC through a rectifier and controlled with a voltage regulator to feed the aircraft systems and charge the battery. 
Large aircraft use AC generators for the main AC circuits that also supply DC services through rectifiers. Some smaller gas turbine engines, however, still use DC generators as they have an additional function as starter motors -in this case DC current is fed from the battery to the generator which works backwards as a motor. 
AC advantages: better power to weight ratio, voltages can be changed 
Most piston engine aircraft use alternators rather than DC generators 
AC Electricity 
Star Connections 
Now we have three phases, effectively three separate AC supplies, we have to consider how we wire them up. A star connection, shown in this diagram, is used for alternators. 
Each pair ofstator coils is connected at one end to a common star, wye or neutral point and at the other end to the output, through a load and then back to the star connection via a return line. Loads can also be placed between any two outputs to use a different, higher RMS, voltage. The voltage between a single output, a live line, and the return is called a phase voltage the voltage between two live lines is called the line voltage. 
The RMS line voltage is the sum of two out of phase stator coil supplies which is .3 (or 1.73) x the RMS phase voltage, therefore the line voltage is higher than the phase voltage. In aircraft applications the phase voltage is 11 Sv, so the line voltage is 115 x 
1.73 = 200 V. The line current is equal to the phase current as the loads are placed in the live lines, not in the return. 
ft+M+lo 
Phase A 
Line voltageReturn 
Phase B Phase C 


Phase voltage Line voltage 


Phase A Phase B Phase C 
Alternators are star wound Star wound generators can produce two voltages Line current equals phase current, line voltage is greater than 
phase voltage 
AC Electricity 
Star Connections continued 
Although multiple phases can be used most aircraft loads are single phase loads and therefore placed between the live line and the return. If the loads are kept fairly equally distributed between the phases, as when one current is positive the other two are likely to be negative, the current tends to flow only along the live lines and the return line current is fairly low. 
If a single phase of an AC generator fails, perhaps because of a broken wire or open circuit, then the current in the other two phases will not be balanced and the flow down the return line will increase. Ifthere is a short between a phase and the return line, line to earth, or between two phases, line to line, the current will markedly increase leading to overheating in the stator coils. In short, a failure in one phase of a star wound (connected) system affects all phases. 
Domestic electricity makes use of the star winding. High voltage power is three phase but is split into single phases for small groups of houses. The domestic plug has a live wire in to the plug, a live wire out of the plug and, in the UK, an earth line which literally uses the earth to connect to the wye point of the supply. The theory is that, ifthe loads are balanced in the street then no current flows through the earth line. Many countries dispense completely with the earth connection. 

Phase A 
Line voltageReturn 
Phase B Phase C 


Phase voltage Line voltage 


Phase A Phase B Phase C 
A failure in one phase of a star wound system affects all phases 
AC Electricity 
ft+iitii=fo 
Capacitance, Inductance, Impedance & 
Reactance 

Insulating layer
+ 
or dielectric 
AC circuits do not behave quite the same way as DC circuits 
+ 
because current flow and voltage are continually changing. This 
+
Charged plate Charged plate
changing current and the devices in an AC circuit can produce 
+ + + 
effects which are not found in a DC circuit. 
Capacitance and Capacitors 
Capacitors are used to store an electrical charge. They are made by placing a non-conducting material, called a dielectric, between two conducting plates. Applying a voltage to one plate builds up a charge on that plate, positive or negative depending on the voltage, and a matching opposite charge on the other. If the capacitor is disconnected once the charge has been built up it will hold the charge until a circuit is created again allowing it to 

discharge. The plates have a relatively large surface area so it  
takes a little time for the charge to build up. The discharge is  A one farad capacitor with one volt applied to it will store one  
quicker.  coulomb of energy.  
The amount of electricity a capacitor can store is called its  
capacitance and is measured in Farads. A capacitor in a circuit is  
shown by this symbol, similar to the symbol for a battery but with  
two lines ofthe same length.  

AC Electricity 


Capacitance and Capacitors 2 Insulating layer
+
The value of capacitance depends on: 

or dielectric 
+ 
¦ The area of the plates. 
+
Charged plate Charged plate
¦ The distance between the plates. 
+ + + 
¦ The material of the dielectric. 
Capacitance is directly proportional to the area of the plates and inversely proportional to the distance between them. The value of the dielectric is expressed as a number derived from comparing the electrostatic field of the material, with that of a vacuum and called the dielectric constant (K). Capacitors are used in aircraft fuel gauging systems, where the value of K for fuel is about 2 compared to 1 for air. 
Capacitors act differently when fitted to DC and AC circuits. In a 
DC circuit the capacitor acts like a switch. Once charged there will be no further flow in the circuit and any other loads will cease to operate. 
AC Electricity 
Capacitance and Capacitors 3 
A capacitor in an AC circuit will build up a charge as current flows into it in one direction, then discharge and build up an opposite charge as the current reverses. Loads in the circuit will still work. The maximum charge across the plates occurs when the supply current is zero, just before it reverses, and the maximum discharge current occurs when the supply voltage is zero. This is odd, because normally voltage and current are in phase and high voltage means high current. The implication is that, in a purely capacitive AC circuit, the capacitor has the effect of shifting the current and voltage goo out of phase. Strictly, current leads voltage by go0 . 
Current leads voltage with capacitors in the circuit 
AC Electricity 
Capacitance and Capacitors 4 
In reality there is always some resistance in a circuit and it can never be purely capacitive. This means the current never quite leads the voltage by the full 90°, all we can say in reality is that current leads voltage in a capacitive circuit. 
This effect of capacitance in an AC circuit is called capacitive reactance and, as it opposes current flow, it acts like resistance and is measured in ohms. Capacitive reactance is also affected by frequency. Capacitive reactance is inversely proportional to frequency. So as frequency rises capacitive reactance reduces and current flow will increase. 
Another way of putting it is that capacitors act as low resistances to high frequencies and high resistances to low frequencies. A mnemonic helps here, Cows Love Really Happy Farmers for Capacitors have Low Resistance to High Frequencies. 
Capacitors act as high resistance to low frequencies 
AC Electricity 
Inductors and Inductance 
We know that as a magnet is inserted into a coil ofwire a current is induced in the wire. What we have yet to consider is that the induced current will have its own magnetic field which, depending on its sense, would either encourage the initial movement or oppose it. Judicious use of Fleming's left and right hand rules will show that the induced current creates a field that opposes the movement this is Lenz's law. The induced current always flows in such a direction as to oppose the change that is giving rise to it. The opposition can be viewed as an opposing voltage, called a back emf. 
In any AC circuit the collapse of the current before it reverses direction and the subsequent build up will produce a change of the magnetic field and a back emf will be induced. This back emf will be small in a simple circuit but larger if many coils and windings are included. The effect of the back emf, of inductance, is to resist current flow. 
Inductance will be a feature of all AC circuits which include coils such as motors, generators, electro-magnets and transformers. 
Inductive components mounted close to each other can induce electrical currents in each other. This undesirable induction, known as interference, can cause problems. 
The induced current always opposes the movement 
AC Electricity 

Inductors and Inductance 2 
The unit of inductance is the Henry (L). If an emf is induced of 1 volt with a current flow of 1 amp an inductance of 1 L (Henry) is produced. The effect of inductance is called inductive reactance and act like resistance in that it affects current flow. Inductive reactance is measured in ohms. 
An inductance is shown in a circuit by this symbol. 
7JJJJJJ 
Notice the similarity to the symbol for resistance, we shall use this later to remind us that inductors in series and parallel behave the same as resistors. 
We would expect the maximum back emf when the rate of change of current in a circuit is at its greatest. This is where the current is zero, reversing direction from one way to the other. The minimum back emf is where the rate of current change is least. The effect of inductance is not dissimilar to the effect of capacitance except here current lags behind voltage as shown in this illustration. 
Inductors are also frequency sensitive but this time reactance is directly proportional to frequency high resistance at high frequencies and low resistance at low frequencies, the opposite of capacitors. 


Inductance is measured in Henrys Induced current lags behind the voltage Inductors create high resistance to high frequencies 

AC Electricity 
Inductors and Inductance 3 
Use the mnemonic CIVIL to remember the lead and lag. 
C  In Capacitors the  
Current (I) leads the  
V  voltage, and the  
Current (I) lags the voltage in  
L  Inductors (L)  

As we have seen the effects of capacitive reactance and inductive reactance are opposite the suspicion grows that capacitors and inductors are complementary and that one can be used to balance the effect of the other. Most circuits have both, and of course they will have resistance as well. 
Capacitive reactance leads current flow, resistance is in phase with it and inductive reactance lags behind current flow, so there cannot be a straight addition of the three. 
The total resistance to current flow in an AC circuit with capacitive and inductive reactance is called impedance and is the vector sum of all three. 

Resistance in phase with current 
Capacitive reactance 
Inductive reactance current leads voltage 
voltage leads current 
Resistance Impedance 
Impedance is the vector sum of resistance and reactance 
AC Electricity 
Capacitors and Inductors in a Circuit 
For total inductance, inductors are added in the same way as resistors, for total capacitance, capacitors are added the other way around. The total opposition to current flow in an AC circuit with a combination of reactance (capacitive and inductive) and resistance is called impedance. Impedance is the vector sum of all three, as shown in the illustration on the previous page. 

Inductors in series: LroTAL = Inductors in parallel: 
1 1 1 
= -+-+­
LTOTAL L, L2 L3 

Capacitors in series: 
Capacitors in parallel: 
Inductors in a circuit are summed in the same way as resistors Capacitors are summed in the opposite way 



Lesson 23 
AC Generator and Motors 

AGK 23 
AC Generator and Motors 
ft+FR+io 
AC Power 
We know that power equals voltage multiplied by amps. So for a simple resistive only circuit (no capacitors or inductors) we can plot a graph of voltage, current and power as below. Power is at a maximum when volts and amps are also at their maximum values. 


Resistive circuit 
AC Generator and Motors 
ft+ii+io 
AC Power2 
In a circuit which contains a capacitor or an inductor, the voltage will be out of phase with the current. If we plot voltage and current for an out of phase circuit, then we can see that the peak power is lower. 
The maximum power is no longer the product of voltage and current at their maximum but the product of lesser values. This means that power in a capacitive (or inductive) circuit is reduced. Obviously the answer to this is to balance a capacitor with an inductor to bring the current and voltage back into phase if we achieved this we would have a resonant circuit, a circuit where the impedance is totally resistive. 


AC Generator and Motors 
AC Power 3 
Assuming, for the moment, that we have failed to achieve resonance then the impedance of the circuit will be made up of the resistance and the reactance, both capacitive and inductive. 
The work done by the generator overcoming resistance is useful or real power. The work done overcoming reactance is wasted effort, called reactive power or reactive load. Reactive loads waste power. This can be represented by our familiar vector diagram. 
The ratio of useful work (useful power) to total work (total power) is a measure of the efficiency of a circuit. This is called the power factor the power factor is also the cosine of the angle between the real power and the apparent power. 
In practice, this all means that if an AC motor (which has many inductive windings) has a power factor of 0.45 and it is required to put out 500 Wat 25 V, then instead ofjust: 
500 W + 25 V = 20 A What we actually need: 
20 + 0.45 = 44.4A This would suggest a strong case to fit a capacitor in the circuit to increase the power factor. 
ft.lflo 
Useful power Total power available 

Reactive power 
If capacitors & inductors are balanced the circuit is described as resonant Reactive loads waste power The power factor is the useful work divided by the total work 

AC Generator and Motors 


Alternative Solution KW
An alternative solution to the problem on the previous page is shown in this diagram. w 
500 
KVAR VAR 
cos 0 = : 0.45 = 5oo A = 5oo A = 44.4 amps
25 X A 25 X 0.45 
AC Generator and Motors 
Generator Power Ratings 
AC generators are rated to show the total power available in kilovolts A (kVA). The measured output elements are kVA and kVAr, reactive load. 
Typical generator output would be from 30 KVA up to 90 KVA for the largest aircraft. 
ft.iflo 

Example: An AC generator rated at 90 KVA is operating in a circuit with a power factor of 0.8. What will be the useful output? Solution: The useful output is 0.8 x 90 = 72 KW. We can use the KW unit for real power. 

AC Generator and Motors 
Generator Power Ratings 
The power factor formula is best remembered using the units involved POWER FACTOR= KW+ KVA 
We can, once again, show the relationship on the vector diagram. The verbal descriptions of KW, KVA and KVAR can be confusing. The following may be used: 
KVA  total or apparent power  
KVAR  idle, reactive or wattless power  
KW  real, true, active, effective or useful power  

Since capacitive and inductance reactance are affected by frequency, any change in the frequency produced by an aircraft generator will affect power in the circuits. 
KW 
w 
500 

cos 0 = : 0.45 = 500 A = 5oo A -44 4
AC Generator and Motors 
ftiM·lo 
AC Frequency Control 
Frequency Wild AC Generators 
AC generators will be frequency wild if there is no control of rpm. Outputs from such generators cannot be paralleled to a common system. 
Frequency wild generators are usually fitted to more simple aircraft where the primary electrical supply is DC. Their output is 208 V, 22 KVA with a frequency range from 280 to 400Hz. This is used directly for engine and prop anti-icing and rectified to DC for the other systems. 


Such a system can only be used for systems which rely upon resistance only and are not affected by frequency, basically heating and non-fluorescent lighting. 

AC Generator and Motors 
Constant Speed Drive Units 
Systems that are primarily AC need frequency and voltage control. To produce a constant frequency generator a Constant Speed Drive Unit (CSDU or CSD) is used. This consists of a hydraulic/mechanical unit with its own hydraulic oil supply. As well as providing the hydraulic power for operation the oil in the CSDU is used for cooling the unit. The CSD is connected to the engine by a dog clutch release mechanism known as the CSD disconnect. 
As engine speed or load on the generator changes the CSD alters its output torque to keep the generator running at the same speed and constant frequency. The frequency is stabilised to between 380 Hz and 420 Hz, quoted as 400 Hz, from a typical rotation speed of 6000 RPM. 

Engine 
CSD disconnect 
As inductive reactance is sensitive to frequency, a constant frequency output is required 
Generator Quill shaft 400Hz 

AC Generator and Motors 

Constant Speed Drive Units continued 
High CSD oil temperatures, low pressures and low oil levels indicate an impending failure of the CSD. If any of these occur a warning light in the cockpit alerts the pilots to disconnect the CSD. 
The CSD disconnect can be operated at any time during flight and at any engine RPM but ideally the engine should be at idle to reduce the shock loads. A warning light indicates the CSD disconnect has been operated. 
The CSD disconnect may be operated on the ground if the engine is running above minimum ground idle rpm. Once operated in flight the disconnect can only be reset on the ground by the engineers with the engine stopped. In some installations and for some particular malfunctions an automatic CSD disconnect is provided. 
The final protection for the CSD is a quill drive with a waisted section that is designed to shear if the generator seizes and overloads the drive. 
Engine 
CSD disconnect 
Once disconnected the CSDU can only be reset on the ground 
Generator Quill shaft 400Hz 
AC Generator and Motors 
More modern designs have a CSD mounted in the same casing as the generator, in which case it is known as an Integrated Drive Generator (IDG). The IDG used on the Boeing 737NG is cooled by both fan air and a fuel/oil heat exchanger. It has an automatic CSD disconnect for high oil temperature. There is also a cockpit warning and a manual disconnect for low oil pressure. The A320 family use an IDG with a fuel cooled oil cooler. This IDG has a manual disconnect for high oil temperature or low oil pressure. 
If oil is visibly seen leaking from an engine the source needs to be identified and isolated if possible to reduce the fire risk. The usual suspects are engine oil, hydraulic oil or CSDU/IDG oil. It might be possible to identify the source by observing the instrumentation for each of the systems. Both the hydraulic pump and the CSDU/IDG can be isolated. An engine oil leak can only be stopped by shutting the engine down. 
A combination generator and CSDU is called an IDG 


A VSCF drive takes the variable output of a frequency wild generator, rectifies it to DC then converts it again to constant frequency AC with an inverter. The VSCF drive was developed for the B737-300 to -500 series and was intended to improve reliability. In practice it has proved less reliable than the CSDs that preceded it and has been replaced on the B737 NG with an IDG. 
Paralleling AC Generators 
The reactive load on a generator is affected by the frequency and by the rated output in KVA which is in turn affected by voltage. The real load (KW) is affected by the rated output and the reactive load. It can be seen that the KW, KVA and KVAR are interconnected and any adjustment in frequency will affect both KW and KVAR. If generators are to be paralleled frequency is adjusted by adjusting the CSD output torque to balance the real load and then the reactive loads are trimmed by adjusting the energising current from the voltage regulator. 
In summary: 
¦ 
Real Load -adjusted with CSD Torque. 

¦ 
Reactive Load -balanced by energising current. 


Frequency adjusts real load & reactive load is controlled by voltage 
AC Generator and Motors 
Auxiliary Sources of AC Power 
In the event of loss of an engine driven generator in flight, either through generator or engine failure, there are other ways of providing AC power. 
Auxiliary Power Units (APUs) 
An APU is a small gas turbine engine fuelled from the aircraft main fuel supply that can provide power to drive a three phase generator to produce normal 115/200 volts AC at 400 Hz. It is capable of supplying all the essential electrical loads on its own. On older aircraft it cannot be paralleled with the aircraft's generators as the APU has no CSDU and the turbine speed can vary. On modern, constant speed, APUs the APU generator can be paralleled. 
APUs are normally started electrically. Some aircraft such as the B737 have independentAPU batteries for starting others such as the A320 start the APU from the main aircraft batteries. 
As well as providing back up electrical power in flight the APU can be used to power the aircraft systems on the ground prior to engine start. 
Constant speed APUs can be paralleled 


Hydraulic Drive Units 
Some aircraft such as the B737 are fitted with constant speed hydraulic motors that can, in emergency, be used to drive an AC generator. Such generators produce the same 115/200 V 400Hz AC output but at a reduced power rating. They are not designed to run all of the electrical systems, only the essential AC busbars. 
AC Generator and Motors 
Ram Air Turbines (RATs) 
Emergency generators can be driven directly by Ram Air Turbines but, more usually, the RAT is used to power a hydraulic system and the hydraulic system powers the emergency generator. The RAT, therefore, powers both flying controls and essential electrics. As an example, the A320 family of aircraft have a RAT which, in the event of loss of all generators, deploys to pressurise the blue hydraulic system. A hydraulic drive unit on that system drives an emergency generator which powers the AC and DC essential busbars. You can take a closer look at the RAT using the 3D model on the next page. 
Inverters 
AC power for essential services can be obtained from DC by either static or rotary inverters. The oldest type of inverter, the rotary inverter, is essentially a DC electric motor which drives an AC generator. More modern static inverters use solid state electronics to do the same thing. 
While the input to an inverter is invariably 28 V DC, the output voltage varies according to need. The two most common outputs are 115 V AC as an alternative means to supply a bus bar normally supplied by an engine driven generator or 26 V AC to supply an instrument bus bar. 
Ram Air Tubine 
Hydraulic Speed 
Blade 
pump sensor 
Inverters convert DC to AC 
AC Generator and Motors 
AC Motors 

DC motors are ideal for high torque applications and applications where variable speed control is needed. In other situations more reliable AC motors can be used. 
There are two main types, the synchronous motor and the induction motor. The synchronous motor runs at a speed that is related to its supply frequency and thus maintains speed as load varies. The induction motor tends to lose speed as load increases but in its two or three phase forms has the advantage that it is inherently self-starting. 
Synchronous Motors 
Do you recognise this animation? This is a three phase motor, exactly the same as the three phase alternator except now the current is fed into the stationary field coils causing the rotor to rotate. Motor speed is therefore directly related (synchronous) to voltage frequency if not overloaded. Under higher loads, the rotor falls behind the rotating magnetic field reducing efficiency, torque then reduces in turn and the motor slows and quickly stalls. 


AC Generator and Motors 
Synchronous AC Motors continued 
Synchronous AC motors are used for low torque, constant speed applications such as the drive to a tachometer. They may be single or three phase. 
As they are not self-starting, an inductive system is incorporated to bring the motor up to synchronous speed when it then becomes a solely synchronous motor. On occasions a separate DC supply is used to create an electro-magnet on the rotor. 
Synchronous AC motors are low torque and constant speed 
Synchronous AC motors are not self starting 
The speed of a synchronous motor depends upon the frequency ofthe supply and the number of pole pairs (pairs of rotors) and is obtained by dividing the AC frequency by the number of phases ­this give revolutions per second, so to get RPM we must multiply by 60. You should recognise this formula as a rearrangement of the formula used for generators. 
Frequency (Hz) x 60 
Synchronous speed (RPM) = ----'-...;._'---­Number of pole pairs 


Example: An AC motor has fourpole pairs, what synchronous speed is achieved with an input frequency of 400Hz? Solution: 
Synchronous speed (RPM)  =  Frequency (Hz) x 60  
Number of pole pairs  
400 X 60  
=  
4  
=  6000 rpm  

AC Generator and Motors 
Induction Motors 
The induction motor differs from the synchronous motor in that instead of using a magnet as a rotor, coils of wire are used. This diagram shows an induction motor. The six black dots represent three coils shown in cross section in reality there would be many more. 
The changing electromagnetic field produced by the stator coils induces a current in the wire which in turn produces its own magnetic field. The magnetic field of the rotor is attracted to the rotating electromagnetic field ofthe stator so the rotor ends up chasing the stator field. 
As the rotor speed builds up towards the speed of the stator field the relative movements of the fields reduce and thus the induced emfand ultimately the torque that makes the rotor turn reduces. This means that the rotor can never turn quite as fast as the stator field. The difference between the two is called the slip speed and it will increase as the torque load on the motor increases. 
Increasing slip speed caused by high torque loads increases inductive reactance and therefore reduces motor efficiency in terms of the ratio of power in to power out. This means induction motors are at their most efficient under light loads. The induction motor is commonly used for fuel and hydraulic pumps, gyro rotors, gyro torque motors and AC actuators. 


Induction motors run slower than synchronous speed, the difference is the slip speed 
AC Generator and Motors 
Induction Motors 2 
Induction motors may be single or three phase but single phase motors will not be self-starting. A curiosity of mathematics means that only two of the phases of a three phase motor need to be reversed to reverse the direction of the motor. Consider a three phase supply running ABCABCABC, if we reverse A and B we get BACBACBAC. 
Rather than use loops of wire, induction motors often use a series of copper or aluminium bars connected to circular metal endplates, each opposite pair act like a closed single loop coil. This is called a squirrel cage motor. 
The diagram is stylised and only shows two loops. In reality, once again, there would be many more. A more realistic representation is shown on the next page. 
.---Current flow in loop 
I 
Rotor 
Magnetic field induced in loop 

AC Generator and Motors 


Induction Motors 3 Bearings
In these two images, the squirrel cage rotor can be seen inside the loops of the stator field coils. You can take a closer look using the 3D model on the next page 
If a three phase induction motor suffers an open circuit fault on one of the phases then it will continue to run but at only about half speed unless the loads are very heavy when it may stop altogether. Once stopped, it will not be possible to re-start the motor whilst the fault persists. If a short circuit occurs between 

Drive two phases then the motor will overheat and slow down in shaft 
proportion to the applied load. 
Stator 
A faulty induction motor will run slow or stop 

AC Generator and Motors 
Delta Connections 
You will recall that generators use a star connection where the return line is required because unless the loads are exactly equal in each phase there will be an unbalanced current. When the loads can be made permanently and exactly equal, for instance where the alternator is used 'backwards' as a motor, the return line can be dispensed with and the phases connected by a delta connection. 
With this connection line voltage is the same as phase voltage but line current must be more than phase current as each line is connected to two phases and two loads. In fact the line current is .3 x phase current or, if you prefer, 1. 73 x phase current. Thus we can say that, in a delta system, voltages are equal but line current is greater than phase current whereas in a Star system currents are equal and line voltage is greater than phase voltage. Use the symbols V ~V to remember that voltages are equal in a delta system, once you have that everything else can be figured out. 
If a single phase on a delta connection is earthed all phases will be earthed. As we have observed an open circuit in one phase will mean the motor continues to run but more slowly. 
Delta connections are used in motors, rotary rectifiers and transformers. 


Line voltage 

Phase voltage 

VtN, delta wound voltages are equal 



Lesson 24 
AC Devices 

AGK 24 
AC Devices 
ft+FH+-lo 
AC Devices 
Transformers 
Some systems on the aircraft may require lower AC voltages than the generated 115/200 V AC supply. Aircraft instrument systems often work off a 28 V AC supply. To achieve this transformers are used to power busbars at reduced AC voltages. 
Transformers use the principles of electromagnetic induction to increase ( step up) or decrease ( step down) AC voltages. Ifthe voltage increases the current must reduce and vice versa as the power out must be the same as the power in, assuming no power lost in the transformer itself. 

Transformers step up or step down AC voltages 
AC Devices 
ft.ii+lo 
Transformers continued 
Transformers have two sets of windings, the primary input windings and secondary output windings, arranged on a laminated metal core. Note that the two sets of windings are not electrically connected in anyway. 
An alternating current in the primary windings induces a magnetic field in the core which in turn induces an alternating current in the secondary windings. The output current and voltage will depend upon the proportion of windings between each coil. More coils on the secondary windings than the primary will step up the voltage, fewer will step it down. The relationship is straightforward, twice as many turns produces twice the voltage and, of course, half the current. 
Transformer cores are made up of laminated sheets in order to reduce the eddy currents which are induced at right angles to the field and will have a heating effect. 
The transformer is particularly useful if you have to transmit electricity a long way. Very high voltages can be used with correspondingly low current and consequently low power loss. The heating effect of electricity is l2R, remember. 
Transformers can be multi phase, and in a three phase system the transformers will be delta wound as the loads are predictable and can be balanced. 

Twice the turns, twice the voltage but half the current Three phase transformers are delta wound 
AC Devices 
ft+it+lo 
Auto Transformers 
If a step up or step down in voltage is required in a low current circuit then an auto transformer may be used. Primary and secondary coils are combined in one coil and the output current is tapped off at the appropriate number of turns. The step down is over a wide range, but the step up is usually limited to around 110­115% of the input. 
Secondary
Simpler and lighter in construction than a normal transformer, this type is usually only used for lighting in aircraft. 
Primary 

AC Devices 
Rectifiers 
A rectifier allows current to flow easily in one direction but not in the other direction. Rectifiers in normal circuits can be semiconductors or valves called diodes. 
Semiconductor diodes are made from silicon or germanium 'doped' or made impure with other materials such as boron. Doped crystals can either have an excess of electrons in which case they are known as N or negative type material or a shortage of electrons, called electron holes, in which case they are called P or positive type material. If N and P type materials are placed next to each other current can flow from N to P, negative to positive, but not from P to N. This creates a PN diode, the most common rectifier. 
The circuit diagram symbol for a diode is shown here and it would permit conventional current flow in the direction of the arrow, in this case from left to right. 
.I 

.I (\ (\
r

Input Output 
Rectifiers allow current to flow in only one direction 
AC Devices 
ft.ii+lo 
Rectifiers 2 
Neither valves nor semi-conductors are suitable for circuits with very high currents. In these cases an AC motor can be used to drive a DC generator to produce the same effect. This is a rotary rectifier. 
The simplest form of rectification is half wave this can be done with a single diode. 
Full wave rectification of a single phase using four diodes provides a better DC output. 
Input 




Just one diode for single phase, half wave rectification Four diodes are used for single phase full wave rectification 
AC Devices 
ft+H+lo 
Rectifiers 3 
To provide full wave rectification of a three phase supply six diodes are required. This will produce a fairly smooth DC output. 



pxxmm 
Three phase input Output 
Six diodes are used for 3 phase full wave rectification 

AC Devices 
Zener Diodes 
Most diodes will break down and be permanently damaged by high reverse current flows. The zener diode is designed to prohibit reverse current flow to a point and then to allow it. Once reverse current flow is permitted the voltage across the diode remains close to constant for a wide range of reverse currents. This allows the zener diode to be used as a voltage stabilising device. The symbol for a zener diode is: 
Zener diodes are used for voltage stabilisation 
ft+H+lo 

Transformer Rectifier Units (TRU) 
A TRU is a transformer and rectifier in the same unit. Its purpose 

is to transform AC power at one voltage to DC power at another 
voltage, normally lower. In an aircraft 11 Sv AC is transformed to 
28v DC. The TRU shown here shows the general arrangement, 
but in this case not for an aircraft. If you look at the input, 240 V 
AC, and the output, 14 V DC, you can probably work out the 
function of this TRU -it is a standard UK battery charger for car 
batteries. 
-------1 "------;...I -I 

,--------, 
I I 
+I I I I I 
I 
14 VOLTS +-DC-+ 
'--------J 
AC Devices 
Transistors 
Transistors are semiconductors. They are made from three layers of doped silicon or germanium. A layer of P type material is sandwiched between two layers of N type material. In normal circumstances the two PN junctions created would act as back to 
N p N
back rectifiers allowing no current flow in either direction. 
AC Devices 
ft.Mflo 
Transistors 2 
In this case, though, the P material is only very lightly doped, and 
N p N
therefore very weak, so it does initially let much of the current through, about 98% of the electrons. 
2% of the electrons, however, cannot get past the PN boundary and build up in the Player preventing further electrons crossing the NP boundary. Now the current is restricted and in as little as 0.00000005 seconds can be shut off entirely. 


AC Devices 
Transistors 3 
The trick is to allow the electrons in the P layer, properly called the base, to escape down a third wire. Typically removing one electron from the base allows 50 electrons to cross the NPN junction. This means that small fluctuations in base current can be translated to large fluctuations between the other two terminals, the collector and the emitter. 
In this format the transistor can act as an amplifier. If, on the other hand, the current into the base is regarded as being either on or off, perhaps digital pulses, then it will act as a switch on the main circuit. Remember that the function of the base is to control the current through the transistor. 
N p N 
The function of the base is to control the current 
AC Devices 
Transistors 4 
The circuit symbol for a NPN transistor is shown here. 
NPN 
AC Devices 
Transistors 5 
Reversing the materials produces a PNP transistor. An easy way to remember which transistor is which is that the PNP has the arrow Pointing in, whereas the NPN has the arrow Not pointing in. 
Transistorised or semiconductor rectifiers are also known as solid state rectifiers. They are the type fitted to modern aircraft. Transistors are low current devices and can be easily damaged by exposure to large voltages and currents. 
PNP 
Transistors are low current devices 

AC Devices 
AC Power Distribution 
Modern aircraft systems are designed so that, in flight and following a failure, the most important electrical services can be supplied from either a single engine driven generator or an APU. 
AC is distributed through a number of busbars which allow services to be prioritised into vital, essential and non-essential services. Vital and essential service busbars have more backup systems to ensure the power supply is not interrupted. Be aware that the terms vital, essential and non-essential are concepts and the names given to bus bars vary with aircraft. 
28 V DC services are powered from the AC generators through Transformer Rectifier Units (TRUs) which reduce the voltage and rectify it to DC in order to power the DC bus bars and charge the battery, like this charger we met earlier. In an emergency the battery can power the essential AC bus bars through an inverter as well as the DC bus bars and the vital DC bus. 
, ------1 --------.--.. I 
240 VOLTS AC I SUPPLY 
A domestic battery charger -240 V AC in, 14 V DC out. 
M­
AC 

.------------, 

I I I 
+I I I I I 

I 
14 VOLTS 
.-oc-. 
AC Devices 
Ground servicing bus bars 
Modern aircraft have ground servicing or maintenance bus bars. If external ground power is available, a momentary push button will power those bus bars for utility outlets such as cabin lighting, refuelling, hydraulics to open cargo door, battery charging etc, without powering the rest of the aeroplane. This function is overridden when the normal busbars are powered. 
There are two ways of designing an electrical system in normal operation. It is possible to have several generators feeding a common busbar, the parallel system, or to have a single busbar for each generator, the split busbar system shown here. 

AC Devices 
Split Busbar System 
In a split busbar system each engine driven generator feeds an AC busbar. The busbars are only connected in the event ofa generator failure or, possibly, on the ground. Because the generators are not operated in parallel their voltage and frequency can vary slightly and they need not be in phase. 
The generators are connected and disconnected to the busbar by operation ofthe Generator Circuit Breaker (GCB) The GCB can be operated manually by the crew and automatically by the generator control unit (GCU). 
A bus tie breaker (BTB), also called a changeover relay, is fitted between the AC busbars. It is operated by a bus power control unit (BPCU) with inputs from an air/ground logic switch. 

When closed on the ground it allows both busbars to be powered either by external power or by the APU generator. It can also be closed in flight to allow one generator to power both busbars after a failure. 
In a split busbar system each generator supplies its own busbar 
AC Devices 
Split Busbar System continued 
Number 1 and Number 2 AC busbars normally provide DC power to the Number 1 and Number 2 DC busbars through TRUs. The Essential AC services can be fed from either the Number 1 AC busbar or from the battery through an inverter. Essential DC services can be fed from either the TRU or the battery. The battery becomes the final back up for both AC and DC essential services and, when fully charged, should be good for around 30 minutes operation once all other power sources have failed. 
Essential services were defined earlier as those required for continued safe flight in an emergency. They would include flight instruments, control actuators and avionics and may be either AC or DC. 
Vital services are DC and powered directly from the battery busbar, usually called the hot battery busbar because it cannot be disconnected. The A320, for example, has two hot busbars, powering engine and APU fire extinguishers, the parking brake, slide warnings, etc. 
Non-fluorescent lighting to the cabin and flight deck is usually 28 V AC, with a 28 V DC standby. Fluorescent lighting (450 V AC) is used for flight deck storm lighting and also cabin lighting. 

Vital services are DC, often from isolated batteries 
AC Devices 
Paralleled Systems 
In a parallel system in normal operation all the generators are connected to an AC tie or synchronising busbar. 
Before a generator can be paralleled the voltage and frequency must be within limits. In older aircraft the voltage and frequency were checked manually, on modern aircraft the process is automatic. If all the requirements of voltage, frequency and, sometimes, phase relationship are not met the generators cannot be paralleled. 
A three generator parallel system is shown here. Each engine generator is connected to its load busbar via a GCB that can be paralleled through bus tie breakers to a synchronising or tie busbar. The tie busbar has few or no services on it. Its purpose is to connect the power supplies. The DC systems have been left out for clarity. 
r.t GCB 
r.t 8TB 
Paralleled generators supply tie busbars 
AC Devices 
Paralleled Systems continued 
During normal operation the BTBs are closed and each of the generators is connected to the tie/synchronising busbar. The load is shared equally by all generators in this system. In the event of a generator failure the AC tie busbar would continue to be powered but the GCB and the 8TB for the failed generator would be tripped. 
On large four engine aircraft, such as the 8747-400, two independent parallel busbars may be provided with provision to connect them together via a split system breaker (SSB). On the ground there is provision for two external power sources to be connected to the aircraft and two APU generators, powered by a singleAPU, may also be fitted. 
Normal operation is in parallel with the SSB closed but the SSB can be opened in the event of a generator failure in flight or, on the ground, to allow half the aircraft to be powered by external power and half from internal. This diagram shows the arrangement. Once again the DC busbars have been omitted for clarity. 

External External PWR PWR No 1 

No2 
No 1 [ [ No 2 i=--EXT 
I=--GCB I=--GCB 
SN
APU 
AP:i,::,,:•
PWR 
• : • J : 
Ą:~", ::,,:· 
I=--BTB I=--BTB I=--BTB I=--BTB 

Split System Breaker (SSB) 
AC Devices 
Advantages/Disadvantages 
The disadvantage with the split system is that there is a momentary loss of power on the AC busbars as the system switches between sources this does not occur in parallel systems. In parallel systems, the load is shared between the generators and if one generator fails the others take the load without interruption. 
However the parallel system is more complex requiring extreme precision of generator rpm and phase relationships between generators. 
As aircraft have developed, the most vulnerable systems have become the computers. They are DC powered and can be protected from momentary power interrupts by the batteries. As the complexity of parallel systems is no longer required most modern aircraft use split systems. 

External External PWR PWR No 1 


No2 
No 1 [ [ No 2 i=--EXT 
I=--GCB I=--GCB 
SN
APU 
AP:i,::,,:• 
PWR 
• : • J : 
Ą:~", ::,,:· 
I=--BTB I=--BTB 
I=--BTB I=--BTB 

Split System Breaker (SSB) 
AC Devices 

Interpreting Diagrams 
Sample of a split system DC BATBUS ..j .
In your exam you may be asked to interpret a distribution system 
C7-1 Cl-2 Cl -3 Cl-4 
to the standard found in Flight Crew Manuals. The image opposite is an example. Note, the diagram appears to be upside 
BATTERY 1 BATTERY 2 
down to many people as the power supplies are at the bottom. 
It is a split system typical of twin jet aircraft. Any of the three generators (engine 1 & 2 and APU) are capable of supplying the 
C 6-1 C 6-2 
entire system. AC BUS 1 and AC BUS 2 can be supplied by any of 
C 5-1 C5-2 C 5-3
the main sources via contactors. Note, the contactors are named by their level in the diagram C1 at the bottom, C2 next level, C3 next level and so on. 
ESSTRU 

An emergency generator powered by the Ram Air Turbine (RAT) TRU1 ,i: .i: 
j; TRU 2 
@-1
4-1 R
can supply AC ESS BUS, DC ESS BUS and both HOT Bus Bars. 
N 
If all generators fail the batteries can feed DC ESS BUS directly, 
C 3-1 
C3-2
and the AC ESS BUS via a static inverter. Clearly this would be for a limited duration. 

C 2-1 C 2-2 
IfAC BUS 1 failed then everything on that busbar is lost. However 
C1-1 C1-2 C1-3 C1-4
DC BUS 1 can pick up a supply from DC BUS 2 via DC BATT 
~ 
PWR 

BUS. cl:> AXT @N ® 
AC Devices 

Interpreting Diagrams continued 
Sample of a split system DC BATBUS ..j .
What sort of equipment would you expect to find on the various 
C7•1 Cl-2 Cl -3 Cl-4 
busbars? The following are just suggestions and by no means exhaustive 
BATTERY 1 BATTERY 2 
AC BUS 1 & 2 galley, fuel pumps, hydraulic pumps, windscreen heating. 
C 6-1 C 6-2
DC BUS 1 & 2 windscreen heat control, fuel pump control, air conditioning packs, brakes/steering, fire detection, galley, 
C 5-1 C5-2 
spoilers, some nav aids, some radios etc .. 
ESS AC & DC Computers various, VHF radio, HF radio, wing anti­icing, pilot displays, cabin pressure, rudder trim, yaw damper, 
ESSTRU TRU1 ,i: .i: 
j; TRU 2 

@-1
GPWS, ILS other nav aids, autopilot, emergency lighting etc. 4-1 
R N 
HOT BUS 1 & 2 APU starting and control, APU fire detection and 
C 3-1 
C3-2
APU fire protection, FADEC until rpm >15%. 

C 2·1 C 2·2 C1-1 C1-2 C1-3 C1-4 
~ 
N
PWR
cl:> AXT @ ® 
AC Devices 

External Power 
Sample of a split system DC BATBUS ..j .
Virtually every aircraft has an external power socket which 
C7-1 Cl-2 Cl -3 Cl-4 
enables a power source to be plugged into the aircraft when on the ground for servicing and running the systems until either the 
BATTERY 1 BATTERY 2 
APU or engine driven supplies take over. 
Oncoming Source Priority 
C 6-1 C 6-2 
There is a general concept of Oncoming Source Priority, meaning the oncoming source is capable of kicking the existing source 
C 5-1 C5-2 C 5-3 
OFF. For example, during start the aircraft in on external power. When the APU gen is selected to ON the external power is kicked OFF. When the engine driven generator is selected ON, theAPU 
ESSTRU 

gen is kicked OFF. The reverse is usually true. On shut down, TRU1 ,i: .i: 
j; TRU 2 
@-1
4-1 R N
when theAPU gen is selected ON, the engine driven gen is kicked 
OFF. When Ground Power is selected ON the APU gen is kicked 
C 3-1 
C3-2
OFF. Be aware that aircraft vary slightly in how oncoming source priority in managed. 
C 2-1 C 2-2 
C1-1 C1-2 C1-3 C1-4 
~ 
N
PWR
cl:> AXT @ ® 

AC Devices 
Protection and Generator Control 
Generator Control Unit (GCU) 
A GCU is provided for each of the aircraft's generators. The GCU monitors power quality, it consists of a number of relays that are sensitive to generator voltage and frequency. Protection is provided for: 
• 
AC generator over voltage . 

• 
AC generator under voltage 

• 
Under-frequency 

• 
Over-speed (high frequency) 

• 
Excess current 

• 
Differential fault (internal short) When a fault is sensed the GCU automatically opens the GCB to remove the generator from the busbar and trips the exciter relay to 


cut the power to the generator field and stop the production of electricity. Faults from the CGU are placed in memory. 
The GCU also receives inputs when the fire handle pulled in the event of engine failure or fire. When the fire handle is pulled the GCU operates to trip the GCB and exciter relay for that generator. 

Excitation Breaker 
GCU 
, 
Over volts Under volts Excess current Under frequency 
F.-GCB 
Over frequency 
\.. ~ 


Generator failures are often transient and, once the failed generator has been isolated, the cause of the fault can be determined. It is often possible to subsequently close the exciter relay, confirm the generator is once more operating within limits then manually close the GCB to bring it back on line. 
AC Devices 
Bus Tie Breakers and Transfer Busbars 
Bus Tie Breakers have different roles in split and parallel systems. In a split bus system the BTB is normally open as the generators cannot be paralleled. If only one power supply is available the BTB automatically closes so that both the left and right systems are powered. 
The role of the BTB in a split system is sometimes filled by special transfer busbars, which will normally be supplied by their individual generators, but switch automatically to the remaining source in the event of a power failure. In a parallel system the BTBs are normally closed and the load busbars are connected to the tie or synchronising busbar. 
If there is a generator fault on a parallel system the GCU will take the generator offline and also open the BTB between that generator's load busbar and the tie busbar. Once it has been established that a generator fault exists rather than a busbar fault, the BTB can be remade and the load busbar powered from the tie busbar. If the problem is a phase relationship defect, then only the BTB will open, as the generator is serviceable, and can therefore operate a busbar, but it cannot be paralleled. 

Supply/Busbar Failure 
We need to distinguish between generator and busbar failure, in particular the outcomes of each. 
As we just saw, in the parallel system if a generator failed it also led to a temporary loss of output from its busbar because it was isolated from the rest of the system. Why do we need to isolate the busbar? Put simply, it might be that the generator failure was caused by the busbar. Let's say the busbar has developed a short circuit thereby drawing a massive current from the generator causing it to under volt or over load. If the bus bar were not isolated then the issue would transfer to the other generators possibly leading to a total electrical failure. 
In the above case the crew would need to locate the fault and if possible isolate it before attempting to restore power. If they are not able to locate the fault then the busbar and its services are lost. 
However, if the fault can be traced to the generator then, in most cases, another generator can supply that busbar and no services are lost. It becomes clear that a busbar fault is a much bigger issue than a generator fault. 
AC Devices 
Load Shedding 
In the event of generator failure it is normal, particularly on older aircraft, to have to turn off non-essential electrical services. This is known as load shedding. Most modern systems have some form of automatic load shedding device, typically disconnecting the galley power or passenger entertainment. 

Summary 
A generator fault on a split busbar system will cause the GCU to: ¦ open the GCB, disconnecting the generator from its busbar. 
¦ 
trip the exciter relay, cutting its output. 

¦ 
close the BTB in order to power both main busbars from the main generator or, depending on type, switch the transfer bus. 


A generator fault on a parallel system will cause the GCU to: 
¦ open the GCB, disconnecting the generator from its busbar. 
¦ trip the exciter relay, cutting its output. 
¦ open the 8TB, isolating the busbar of the failed generator from the tie busbar. 
AC Devices 
Cockpit Indications and Controls 
Cockpit indications and controls vary widely. Early systems gave full manual control to the crew and had extensive indications on the Flight Engineer's panel. Later systems are more automatic and designed for two pilot operation. The example we are going to look at is from the B737 series, not the NG which has quite limited indications, but from the earlier 300/400/500 series. 
The B737 has a modern split distribution system with two AC generators and an APU generator. Each generator supplies its own load busbar and a transfer busbar. In the event of a generator failure the transfer busbars will switch to the remaining operating generator. The controls are all located on the left overhead panel, above the Captain's head. 
The top panel allows the pilots to check the output of the DC and AC supplies. The left hand two meters are for DC current and voltage with a rotary switch below the meters to select the source to be displayed. The right hand two meters are for AC frequency (in cycles per second, shown as CPS) and voltage. Once again, the rotary switch below the meters is used to select the source. There is a battery switch, a galley power switch and a RESID VOLTS button which, when pressed, shows the residual voltage on the AC supplies. 

AC Devices 
Cockpit Indications and Controls 2 
The middle panel holds the controls and indicators for the CSDs. Indicator lights show low CSD oil pressure or high oil temperature. A central switch determines whether the gauges at the bottom of the panel show input oil temperature or the rise in oil temperature in the CSD or Variable Speed Constant Frequency (VSCF) drive. A STANDBY POWER SWITCH controls the power source for essential AC and DC systems. Red covers protect the CSDNSCF disconnect switches. You will also see the caution that the drive can only be reconnected on the ground once disconnected in flight. 
AC Devices 
Cockpit Indications and Controls 3 
The panel opposite shows the AC generator load in amps and allows the ground power to be selected ON or OFF. Below that is the BUS TRANSFER switch, normally left in AUTO, and a set of four amber indicator lights that show when a transfer bus or main AC bus is unpowered or blue captions to show when a generator is not supplying the bus. A further blue APU GEN OFF BUS light shows when the APU is running but it is not supplying a generator. 
A row offour switches manually connect and disconnect the main and APU generators from each generator busbar. OFF trips the generator field and disconnects the GCB, ON excites the field and closes the CGB when the power quality is correct. 




AGK 25 
Logic Circuits and Computers 
The Binary Number System 
We use numbers between zero and nine to count. Once we get beyond nine we start with one and zero again, which we call ten, and count up to nineteen. After nineteen is twenty, or two tens and no units and on to twenty-one, two tens and one unit, and continue on through hundreds, thousands and millions. This is the decimal system, or numbers based on ten, and derives directly from the numbers of digits on our hands. 
Other number systems exist. Digital computers work with numbers based on multiples of two, the binary system. Just as we have no single symbol for ten, relying instead on a one and a zero, the binary system has no single symbol for two or above. The table shows the effect as we count up. 
In the table below, we can see that a series of ones and zeros have been used to represent a specific number in binary form (101101 ). That number is 45, as it consists of no 64, one 32, no 16 and so on. 
64 32 16 8 4 2 
0 0 
ft.ihil o 

Decimal  Binary  Meaning  
0  0  No unit  
1  1  One unit  
I  2  10  One two, no unit  
I  3  11  One two, one unit  
4  100  One four (two squared), no twos, no unit  
5  101  One four (two squared), no twos, one unit  
I  6  110  One four (two squared), one two, no unit  
I  7  111  One four (two squared), one two, one unit  
8  1000  One eight (two cubed), no four, no twos, no unit  
9  1001  One eight (two cubed), no four, no twos, one unit  
10  1010  One eight (two cubed), no four, one two, no unit  

Binary counting only involves two digits 
Logic Circuits and Computers 
The Binary Number System continued 
By the same method, we can see that a binary number written as 111101 would equate to a decimal number of 61, as shown in the table below. 
64 32 16 8 4 2 
0 
The nice thing about this is that all decimal numbers can be reduced to a sequence of ones and zeros. Electrically ones and zeros are very easy to deal with as they can be represented as the positions of a switch, on or off. The very earliest computers used mechanical switches to reproduce the ones and zeros but nowadays millions of small transistors are used instead on an integrated circuit using different voltage levels to represent the ones and the zeroes. 
ft+i.i·lo 

Counting Devices 
The basic counting device is called a "flip-flop". This is a semiconductor with two equally stable states which we could equate with 1 and 0. If a pulse is fed into it when the state equates to Oit will change to 1 and if one is fed in when it is at 1 it will change to 0. 
lfwe start counting with a string of binary zeros representing a string of flip-flops and input a pulse into the first column, units, then 0000 changes to 0001. Of course, unless something is done, the next pulse in will simply change the 1 back to Obut ifwe make the flip-flop output a pulse to the next column as it does this the next digit will change to 1. 
This means two pulses in becomes 0010, which is 2 in binary. The next pulse changes the first flip-flop to 1 again so three pulses is 0011. The fourth changes the first column to zero sending a pulse to column two which also changes to zero and sends a pulse to column three which changes to 1. Now we have four pulses reading 0100, four in binary, and we can theoretically continue counting up to the processing limit of the computer. 
A flip-flop has two equally stable states 
Logic Circuits and Computers 
Bits and Bytes 
In computing an individual binary digit is called a "bit" and a series of "bits" makes a "word". The number of "bits" in a "word" is governed by the computer itself, most modern computers have words of 32 or 64 bits and are therefore called 32 or 64 bit computers. Do not confuse "bits" with "bytes". A "byte" is a unit of storage capacity, the space taken to store a single character, and a "word" may be stored in several "bytes". Computer memory is expressed in units of Megabytes, millions of bytes, and Gigabytes, thousands of millions of bytes. 
A bit is a binary digit, 32 or 64 bits make a word 
A byte is a unit of storage capacity 
ft+IFf·io 

The number 87, expressed in binary form would be: 
• 1010111 • 0110111 • 1010101 • 1011011 
Logic Circuits and Computers 
Logic Gates 


Apart from being used as counters semiconductors as +Sv -,--,-Output (Q)
4 4
--I I -­

combinations of transistors can be put together so that two inputs, 1 I each a one or a zero represented by different voltage levels, can 
Ai Bi 
produce a single output. They can be designed so that different 
Switch Equivalent

combinations of inputs produce different outputs, these are logic gates. Truth Table 
'AND' Gate 
:=[)----.a

The first of three basic logic gates to consider is the AND gate. With two inputs we could have zero and one, one and zero, zero AND Gate and zero or one and one. The AND gate is designed to output a 
Note
one only if the inputs are one AND one, all other combinations 
Logic 1=+5 Volts
produce an output of zero. This can be shown in the table below 
Logic O=OVolts
with the AND gate symbol next to it. This logic gate is often called an "all or nothing gate". It can be helpful to consider logic gates against their switch equivalents, so we have shown that in each of the following series of illustrations. 
Input A  Input B  Output Q  
0  0  0  
0  1  0  
1  0  0  
1  1  1  

Logic Circuits and Computers 
ft.ifff·io 
'OR' Gate 
The second basic logic gate is the OR gate. This is designed to output a one if either of the inputs are one. This is shown in the table below with the OR gate symbol next to it. This gate is also known as an "any or all gate". 
Switch Equivalent 


OR Gate 
Input A  Input B  Output Q  
0  0  0  
0  1  1  
1  0  1  
1  1  1  

Logic Circuits and Computers 
ft+Milo 

'NOT' Gate The third basic gate is the inverter or NOT gate. This reverses any +Sv Output (Q) 
input, a one becomes a zero and vice-versa. The NOT gate symbol is triangular and the output is shown as, A, NOT A. The function of the NOT gate is to invert the input signal so that the output is always the opposite sense. 

Switch Equivalent 
Truth Table 

}----Q 
Input A  Output Q  
0  1  
1  0  

NOT Gate 
Logic Circuits and Computers 
ft.Hf·llo 
'X-OR' Gate 
The fourth gate is the EX-OR gate also known as the Exclusive OR gate which resolves a potential problem ofthe OR gate. Unfortunately, the OR gate includes the AND function. The EX­OR gate excludes the AND function so that it responds to either input A or input B but not both. 
Input A  Input B  Output Q  
1  0  1  
0  1  1  
0  0  0  
1  1  0  

: _:D l-----------e• Q X-OR Gate 
Logic Circuits and Computers 
'NANO' Gate 
The fifth gate is a combination ofthe AND gate and the NOT gate to produce the NANO gate. Now the NOT element is shown by 
+Sv 
the small circle on the output side. This could be described as an inverted AND gate. 
ft.f:ii/lo 
---,-­
I 
Output (Q)
A~ 
---,-­
I Truth Table B~ Switch Equivalent 
Input A  Input B  Output Q  
0  0  1  
0  1  1  
1  0  1  
1  1  0  


NAND Gate 
Logic Circuits and Computers 
Logic gates continued 
The concept of logic gates is frequently used in flight crew manuals. Image shows the logic for the opening ofthe APU bleed valve. When selected ON by the crew, the valve will open provided no air leaks are detected in the LH wing and APU or no leak detected in the RH wing and the APU rpm exceeds 95%. 
Note, this logic permits APU use even though a leak is detected by either Bleed Air Monitoring Computer (BMC). The assumption is that either wing can be isolated. 
ft+Milo 
APU 
APU Bleed Valve Opening Logic 
NoAPU Leak No LH Wing Leak 
BMC 1 APU bleed 
~ ~ 


Note: 1. Leak detection are disregarded during an engine start. 
2. APU leak detection is lost if BMC1 is lost. 
Logic Circuits and Computers 
Life of Electronic components 
We tend to think that as electronic goods have no moving parts they have infinite life: this is not the case they do indeed have a lifespan. What is more, that life expectancy is severely reduced by high temperature and humidity. 
With regard to temperature life is affected by the 10°C -twice law. For example, if a component had an expected life of 80 000 hours at40°C, then when exposed to 50°C (10°C higher) the life expectancy is reduced by half to 40 000 hours. Computers are essential to modern flight, so cooling methods must be employed to keep the aircraft computers within their design temperature range. 
Humidity is also an issue. Mould and corrosion are more likely to cause damage when humidity exceeds 60%. 


Computer life expectancy is affected by temperature. If a computer has a life expectancy of 40 000 hours at 30° C, what would be the life expectancy at 40° C? 
•••  30 000 hours 10 000 hours 20 000 hours  
•  80 000 hours  



Lesson 26 
Principles of Internal Combustion 
AGK 26 
Principles of Internal Combustion 
ft.ih·l o 
Internal Combustion Principles 
Conventional aircraft are powered either by piston or by gas turbine engines. Although the two types look very different, they are both internal combustion engines. In other words, they both convert the chemical energy of the fuel to heat energy. 
As its name implies, an internal combustion engine burns fuel with air internally. In a piston engine, heating the air increases pressure within a cylinder to produce power. In a gas turbine engine heating the air increases its volume, and hence its velocity, and this is used to produce power at a turbine and thrust from its exhaust. 
Internal combustion engines are much easier to understand if you have first grasped the underlying physical principles. It's important that you learn them -not least because some exam questions will directly test your knowledge ofthe physics. So before we examine each engine type in detail we must revisit some elementary principles. 
Combustion 
Combustion 

Principles of Internal Combustion 
ft+i.·l o 
The Properties and Behaviour of Gases 
Boyle's Law 
Boyle's Law describes the relationship between the volume and pressure of a gas. 
The volume of a given mass of gas is inversely proportional to its pressure at constant temperature. Put simply, if a gas is compressed its volume will decrease. If pressure is reduced the volume of the gas will increase. Expressed as a formula: 

Where P = pressure, V = Volume and the absolute temperature of the gas remains constant. 
In practice the situation is a little more complex because any change in pressure will also affect the temperature ofthe gas. 


Principles of Internal Combustion 
ft+IH·lo 
Charles' Law 
Charles' law describes the relationship between the temperature and volume of a gas. 
The volume of a given mass of gas at constant pressure is directly proportional to its absolute thermodynamic temperature. In other words, if the temperature ofthe gas is increased (and its pressure remains constant) it will expand to occupy more volume. 
Expressed as a formula: 
Provided that the pressure remains constant. 


Principles of Internal Combustion 
The Combined Gas Law 
To accurately describe the behaviour of a gas we must combine Boyles' and Charles' laws. 
The true relationship between the pressure (P), temperature (T), and volume (V) of an ideal (hypothetical) gas can be expressed as the formula: 
TPV = a constant 
This allows us to state the following: 
¦ 
If the volume of a gas is kept constant, its pressure will increase with temperature. 

¦ 
If the volume of a gas is reduced, its pressure and temperature will increase. 

¦ 
If the volume of a gas is increased its pressure and temperature will reduce. 

¦ 
If the pressure of a gas is kept constant, its volume will increase with temperature. 



Conservation of Energy 
The law of conservation of energy dictates that energy can be neither created nor destroyed. So in a perfectly isolated system, energy may be converted from one form to another, but it will never be lost. 
This has important implications for the energies contained in a flowing gas. In this context the sum of the pressure, heat and kinetic energies of a given mass of gas must remain constant. 

Principles of Internal Combustion 
ft.iff·l o 
Bernoulli's Equation 
Bernoulli's theorem applies the law of conservation of energy to a gas. It states that the sum ofthe pressure, potential and kinetic energies per unit volume is constant at any point in a non-viscous incompressible fluid in steady subsonic flow. Expressed as an equation: 
static pressure+ dynamic pressure = total pressure = 
constant or 
static pressure+ (1/2 x density x velocity2) = total pressure= 

constant. Velocity 
increases In effect the theory is saying that air mass flow must always be constant. If you increase the rate offlow (the kinetic energy) then the pressure (pressure energy) must drop. 
From this we can make a couple of deductions about the properties of a flowing gas. When gas flows through a restriction (a convergent duct) it must increase its velocity to maintain the same mass flow. Conversely when gas flows into a divergent duct its velocity must reduce. Hence: 
¦ 
A divergent duct will cause a decrease in velocity and an increase in static temperature and pressure. 

¦ 
A convergent duct will cause an increase in velocity and a reduction in static pressure and temperature. 


reduces 
Principles of Internal Combustion 
ft+M·-lo 
Gas Properties 
Given these laws we can make some important deductions about the behaviour of an ideal gas: 
¦ At a constant temperature, pressure will double if the volume 
Throat I Disturbed flow
is halved. 
¦ 
At a constant volume gas pressure will increase with an increase in gas temperature. 

¦ 
At a constant pressure density increases with a decrease in temperature. 

¦ 
In a given mass of flowing gas, as the speed of flow increases the pressure will reduce and vice versa. 


reduces increases 


Undisturbed flow
¦ If pressure and temperature are constant, density will decrease with humidity. 
Principles of Internal Combustion 
ft+H·lo 
Mechanisms for Heat Transfer 
So far we have considered an ideal gas flowing in perfect isolation 
from its surroundings (an adiabatic system). But in practice energy, in the form of heat, is lost to, and gained from, external sources such as the engine components. Energy may also be lost through mechanical inefficiency caused, for example, by friction from bearings. 
Piston and gas turbines engines are no exception. The heat of combustion is transferred to the air and to the engine components. There are three mechanisms by which heat can be transferred from one mass to another: 
Convection 
Heat is transferred indirectly through the circulation of a warm gas or liquid. 
Conduction 
Heat energy passes directly from molecule to molecule when two bodies touch. 
Radiation 
Heat energy radiates as electromagnetic waves from a relatively hot body. These are then absorbed by another body. 

Principles of Internal Combustion 
fti+h·-lo 
Newton's Laws of Motion 
Newton's laws are fundamental to our understanding of how a piston or jet engine generates thrust and how the mass of gas inside these engines behaves. It's very important to learn these laws and to understand that they apply not only to the engine's moving parts but also to the air moving through the engine or the propeller disc. Air has mass and therefore possesses inertia and momentum. 
Newton's 1st Law 
A body will continue in a state of rest or uniform motion in a straight line unless acted on by an external force. 
Newton's 2nd Law 
The rate of change of momentum is proportional to, and takes place in the direction, of the applied force. 
Newton's 3rd Law 
Action and reaction are equal and opposite. 


Principles of Internal Combustion 
ft+M·-lo 

Definitions  
Mass  The quantity of matter in a body.  Work  The work done by a force is defined as the product of  
Weight Inertia  The gravitational force acting on a body at the Earth's surface. The property of a body (which is proportional to its mass) which opposes any change in motion.  the force and the distance moved. The SI unit of worl is the Joule, which is defined as the work done when a force of one newton moves an object through a distance of one metre.  
Force  Force is an influence that causes a body to  Work  =  Force x Distance.  
accelerate, rotate, or cause a deformation of the body. Force is measured by the rate of change of momentum of the body. The SI unit of force is the newton. One newton is equivalent to the force  Power  Power is the rate of doing work. It can be expressed by the formula: p _ Force x Distance ower -Time  
required to accelerate a one kilogram mass at one  
metre per second per second. Force = Mass x Acceleration  The modern (SI) unit of power is the watt (W).  
Momentum  Is the tendency of a body to continue to move in its direction of travel. It's the product of the body's mass and velocity. Momentum = Mass x Velocity.  A watt is 1 joule per second. Engine power output is most commonly expressed in kilowatts (kW).  
Power to  
Weight Ratio  The power to weight ratio is also called specific powe  
output.  It is measured in kilowatts per kilogram  
(kW/kg).  

Principles of Internal Combustion 
Thrust 
The ultimate aim of all aircraft engines is to produce thrust. Piston and gas turbine engines generate thrust by accelerating a mass of air rearwards. Gas turbine engines produce thrust by directly accelerating the air. Piston engines produce power which is then converted into thrust by a propeller. One type of gas turbine engine (the turbo-prop) also produces power to drive a propeller. 
Thrust is the force which moves an aircraft through the air and we have already learned that force= mass x acceleration. 
So the thrust produced by a propeller or jet engine depends on two things: the mass (amount) of air it propels rearwards and the acceleration it imparts to the air. 
ft+it·h·lo 

Its important to understand that the acceleration refers to the increase in speed above that of the air flowing into the engine. So, as an aircraft's forward speed increases, a given mass of air must be given a greater acceleration to produce the same level of thrust. The formula for thrust is: 
F = M x (Vjet -Vrnght) 

where F is thrust, M is the mass of air, Vjet is the speed of the air exiting the gas turbine or propeller and V t1ight is the air speed. 
Principles of Internal Combustion 
Power 
The modern unit of power is the watt, but the older unit, horsepower, is still commonly used. One horsepower equals 746 
W. There are four principal measurements of horsepower: 
Indicated Horsepower (IHP) is the theoretical power produced by a reciprocating engine. It is calculated from the pressure developed in the cylinders but takes no account of the work that must be done within the engine. 
Friction Horsepower (FHP) Friction horse power is the work done within the engine in other words, the work required to drive the engine's mechanical components. 
Brake Horsepower (BHP) or shaft horsepower is the power delivered to, for example, the propeller shaft. It derives its name from the brake drum dynamometer originally used to measure it. BHP is IHP minus the power lost through friction and compression. 
Thrust Horsepower (THP) is the power which is successfully converted into thrust. In a piston engine no useful work is done until the propeller has produced thrust by propelling air rearwards. Propellers are never 100% efficient so the power finally converted into thrust will be less than the BHP. 
ft.iihi-l o 

Efficiency 
The more work that an engine has to do to power its own internal components the less efficient it will be as a power source. The mechanical efficiency of an engine is expressed as the ratio of useful power produced to the theoretical power produced. Modern piston engines are about 80% efficient. 
Engines are also described in terms of their thermal and volumetric efficiency. These concepts are explained in detail later. 


Lesson 27 
Piston Engine Principles of Operation 
AGK 27 

Piston Engine Principles of Operation 
ft.lhi·-l o 
Piston Engines 
Both diesel and spark ignition engines can be referred to as "piston engines". Both types of engine are used in modern aircraft designs and both develop power in the same way. 
Piston engines produce power by converting the chemical energy contained in the fuel to mechanical energy. The fuel is burned with air to release its energy in the form of heat. The heat is absorbed by the gas which experiences a marked increase in pressure energy. This pressure energy is converted to mechanical energy by a piston. Mechanical energy drives the 
Converted to Converted to Converted to
propeller which accelerates air rearwards to produce thrust. 
Chemical Heat Pressure Mechanical energy energy energy energy 


Piston Engine Principles of Operation 
ft+i.i+lo 
The Spark Ignition Engine 
Air is the working fluid of all internal combustion engines. In this context the term "air" covers all the various forms ofgas encountered in the engine. Atmospheric air is sucked in but when mixed with fuel, it is called "the mixture". The gas produced from burning the mixture is usually called the "products of combustion" or "exhaust gas". 
Principle of Operation 
Gasoline fuel (petrol) is mixed with air. The mixture is introduced into a cylinder through an inlet port. The inlet port is then closed by an inlet valve. The cylinder is sealed at the other end by a moveable, but gas-tight, piston. 
The mixture is ignited by an electric spark plug. As combustion takes place the hot air attempts to expand but is confined by the cylinder. This causes a marked increase in pressure which forces the piston down the cylinder. 
The piston is connected to a crankshaft that converts its linear (up and down) motion into rotary motion. The up and down motion of the piston is more accurately described as reciprocal movement hence the term "reciprocating engine". 


Piston Engine Principles of Operation 
ftiihi=hlo 
Principle of Operation 
The crankshaft is either connected directly to the propeller, or indirectly through a gearbox. The propeller accelerates air rearwards which creates an equal and opposite reaction known as thrust. 
The piston and crankshaft arrangement is analogous to a bicycle. By increasing the force applied to the pedals, the cyclist increases the power supplied to the rear wheel. In the same way the increased force exerted by the pistons is translated into increased power to drive the propeller. 


Piston Engine Principles of Operation 
Function of the Major Components 
The major components of a piston engine are shown here. 
Valves
The key points to note are: 
Cylinder head 

¦ The fuel and air are mixed together in a finely measured ratio Spark plug 
Cylinder 
before entering the engine. 
¦ The mixture enters the cylinder through the inlet valve. 
Piston 

¦ 
The piston fits tightly inside the cylinder to ensure that no gas escapes around its sides. Connecting rod 

¦ 
The fuel/air mixture is ignited using an electrical spark plug. 



Crankshaft 
¦ 
The pressure resulting from combustion drives the piston down the cylinder. 

¦ 
The piston is connected to the crankshaft by a connecting rod. 

¦ 
The connecting rod is connected to the crankshaft off-centre from its centre of rotation. This forms a lever arm which translates the reciprocating movement of the piston into the rotary movement of the crankshaft. 

¦ 
After combustion the exhaust valve opens to allow the waste gas to be driven out of the cylinder by the piston. 

¦ 
The inlet and exhaust valves are opened by push rods and a camshaft. They are closed by spring pressure. 



Piston Engine Principles of Operation 
ft+++~,­
The Theoretical Four-Stroke Cycle 
To produce one power stroke, the engine must perform 3 additional strokes to allow mixture into and out of the cylinder, and to pressurise the mixture. This gives a total of four strokes to complete a full cycle. The four strokes, in their order of operation, are as follows: 
¦ 
Induction: the mixture must be drawn into the cylinder. 

¦ 
Compression: the mixture is compressed to maximize the pressure produced by combustion. 

¦ 
Power: The piston is driven down the cylinder to produce mechanical power. 

¦ 
Exhaust: The waste gases must be expelled from the cylinder before the whole process can begin again. 


The four strokes are sometimes better remembered as suck, squeeze, bang and blow. They are more correctly known as the four-stroke cycle or the 'Otto cycle' named after its inventor, Nikolaus Otto. 
The term "stroke" refers to the distance the piston travels between its lowest and highest points within the cylinder. The topmost limit oftravel is called Top Dead Centre (TDC). The lowest limit is called Bottom Dead Centre (BOC). Both are important reference points for the operation of the valves and ignition. 

180° crankshaft rotation 
Top dead centre {TDC) Stroke Bottom dead centre (BDC) 

There are two other important points to note: 
¦ 
Ignition occurs between the Compression and Power strokes. 

¦ 
To move the piston through one stroke, the crankshaft must rotate 180°. 



Piston Engine Principles of Operation 
ft+M+lo 
The Induction Stroke 
The inlet valve opens at TDC just as the piston begins to travel down the cylinder. As the available cylinder volume increases the internal pressure (and temperature) reduces causing the mixture to be sucked into the cylinder. As the piston reaches the bottom of its travel, BOC, the inlet valve closes to seal the chamber. 
An engine that induces the fuel and air in this way is called a normally aspirated engine. 
• 
Inlet valve open 

• 
Piston moves from TDC to BDC 

• Volume increases Induction Stroke 

• 
Pressure reduces 

• 
Temperature reduces 

• 
Total crankshaft rotation 180° 




Piston Engine Principles of Operation 
The Compression Stroke 
The compression stroke begins as the piston starts to travel up the cylinder. Both the inlet and exhaust valves are closed so the pressure and temperature ofthe mixture increases as the volume in the cylinder reduces. At TDC the fuel is ignited by the spark plug. 
Combustion 
Combustion takes place between the compression and power strokes. The mixture is ignited by an electric spark produced by one or more spark plugs located at the top of the cylinder. 
In the theoretical cycle combustion occurs instantaneously whilst the piston is at TDC. Theoretically then, there is no change in volume during combustion. This is why piston engines are sometimes known as constant volume engines. Combustion in such a confined space produces a very large increase in pressure and temperature. 
• 
Inlet valve closed 

• 
Piston moves from BDC to TDC 

• 
Volume decreases 

• 
Pressure increases 

• 
Temperature increases 

• 
Total crankshaft rotation 360° 


Compression Stroke 

Piston Engine Principles of Operation 
ft.f:hftlo 
The Power Stroke 
The rapid rise in pressure causes the piston to be forced down the cylinder. This is the only stroke in the four stroke cycle when power is produced. 
As the available cylinder volume increases, the pressure and temperature of the combusted gas reduces. The average pressure exerted on the piston during the power stroke is called the Mean Effective Pressure (MEP). This value is used to calculate the theoretical power of the engine. 
The power stroke is sometimes referred to as the 'firing expansion stroke'. 
• 
Both valves closed 

• 
Piston moves from TDC to BDC 

• Volume increases Power Stroke 

• 
Pressure reduces 

• 
Temperature reduces 

• 
Total crankshaft rotation 540° 




Piston Engine Principles of Operation 
ft+M+lo 
The Exhaust Stroke 
At BDC, just as the piston begins to rise, the exhaust valve opens. The rising piston causes the pressure and temperature in the cylinder to increase. The products of combustion are expelled from the cylinder through the exhaust valve and out to atmosphere. 
Two revolutions of the crankshaft are required to complete the four stroke cycle. 
• 
Exhaust valve open 

• 
Piston moves from BDC to TDC 

• Volume decreases Exhaust Stroke 

• 
Pressure increases 

• 
Temperature increases 

• 
Total crankshaft rotation 720° 




Piston Engine Principles of Operation 

Work Done on the Air 
The useful work done on the air during the four stroke Otto cycle can be shown graphically. The size of the area bounded by the graph represents the power produced. 
You can see that this area, and thus power, could be increased, either by drawing in more air or by increasing the pressure. These 
~ 
::::J

are important considerations which we will consider later. Ill 
Ill 
~ 

During the theoretical cycle the air is subjected to two adiabatic Q.. processes of compression and expansion (change in pressure with no heat energy added or removed) and two isochoric processes (change in pressure with no change in volume). 
lsochoric combustion 

lsochoric exhaust valve open 
TDC BDC
Volume 

Piston Engine Principles of Operation 
ft+iitii=fo 
The Practical Four Stroke Cycle 
An engine designed to operate the theoretical four stroke cycle would produce some power but it would be very inefficient. 
Air has mass and therefore possesses inertia and momentum. It doesn't want to flow into or out ofthe engine, but once it is flowing it will tend to continue to flow. 
The force that makes the air flow comes from the pressure changes produced by the changing volume of the cylinder. But close to TDC and BOC there is very little linear movement of the piston even though the angular rotation speed of the crankshaft remains unchanged. This is known as the ineffective crank angle and marks the periods where there is little change in cylinder volume and therefore little change in cylinder pressure. 
A further problem with the theoretical cycle is that it assumes that the combustion process is instantaneous. In reality it takes time to completely burn the mixture. Consequently it takes time for the combusting gas to reach maximum pressure in the cylinder. 
Ineffective crank angle 
Small linear 
: movement of piston compared to large angular rotation of crankshaft at TDC and BDC. 


The practical four stroke cycle exploits the characteristics of ineffective crank angle and finite combustion time to maximise engine efficiency. It does this by altering the position at which the inlet and exhaust valves open and close (valve timing) and by adjusting the point at which ignition occurs (ignition timing). 
Piston Engine Principles of Operation 
Valve Timing 
Within the ineffective crank angle the piston can do little work on the cylinder gases. So the valve timing is adjusted to exploit the momentum of the gas and to overcome its inertia. 
As the exhaust stroke comes to its end, but before the piston reaches TDC, the inlet valve opens. This allows fresh mixture to enter the cylinder before the start of the induction stroke proper. 
The process of opening the inlet valve before TDC is known as valve lead. Inlet valve lead and lag both help to maximise the amount of mixture that enters the cylinder. Valve lead and lag is measured in degrees of crankshaft rotation. This is graphically expressed in this diagram, where the opening ofthe inlet valve on the induction stroke is seen to lead by 20°. The figures for valve lead and lag used here are purely representative, so you will not need to remember them for the exams! The complete version of this timing diagram, with all the strokes shown, is available at the end ofthis lesson. 

Induction -Compression'Ct Ignition  Inlet opens  \/aNe  TDC 1 i  
- Combustion  
- Power  
- Exhaust  
Inlet valve closes  

Piston Engine Principles of Operation 
Valve Timing 2 
The inlet valve remains open while the piston travels down the 
Valve lag ­
cylinder and continues to remain open as the piston enters the 
compression stroke 
area of ineffective crank angle at the bottom of the stroke. The momentum of the gas flowing through the inlet valve ensures that mixture continues to flow into the cylinder even though the piston is barely moving. 
The inlet valve remains open beyond BOC, and for a short while as the piston starts its return on the compression stroke. This is called valve lag as shown in this image. The inlet valve closes before the piston passes the ineffective crank angle. In the illustration on the previous page the lag is 70°. 


Piston Engine Principles of Operation 

Valve Timing 3 
When both the inlet valve and the exhaust valves are closed the mixture is compressed. The compressed mixture is then ignited, as shown in this illustration. 
Both valves remain closed at the start ofthe power stroke as the pressure of combustion forces the piston down. 
However, most of the work on the power stroke is done well before the piston reaches BOC -and certainly before it reaches the ineffective crank angle. This gives the engine designer another opportunity to increase efficiency. 

Induction -Compression 
'Ct Ignition 

- Combustion  
- Power  
- Exhaust  

Inlet valve closes 
Combustion Complete
TDC 


Piston Engine Principles of Operation 

Valve Timing 4 
The exhaust valve is opened just before the end of the power stroke in other words, exhaust valve lead as shown in this illustration. The very small theoretical loss in power is more than compensated for by the benefits. Not only is there a longer period available to clear the cylinder of waste gas, but the residual pressure greatly assists the process. 
The exhaust valve remains open until slightly after TDC, valve lag. This allows the last vestiges of exhaust gas to exit under their own momentum. By this time the inlet valve is already open to start the cycle again. 
Combustion Complete
TDC
Induction 6°-12° ATDC 
\/aNe ! 

-Compression 
' 

'Ct Ignition -Combustion -Power -Exhaust 
---Ignition advance 
Inlet valve closes Exhaust valve opens 


Piston Engine Principles of Operation 
Valve Timing 5  
The period when both inlet and exhaust valves are open at the end of the exhaust stroke, and the start of the induction stroke, is called valve overlap as shown here. During the overlap period the action of exhaust gases flowing out helps to draw in the fresh mixture, a process known as scavenging.  Valve overlap• exhaust stroke  
A further advantage of valve lead and lag is the longer period available for valve operation. This reduces the speed at which the valves must work, which significantly reduces the stresses imposed on their operating gear.  
The exact point in the cycle at which each valve opens and closes is dictated by the shape of the cams on the camshaft. Because the cam profile can not be changed, valve timing remains unchanged regardless of engine RPM.  
Some modern car engines can vary the valve timing by the use of hydraulic, rather than mechanical tappets, but this system is not yet used on aero engines.  

Piston Engine Principles of Operation 


Ignition Timing 
It takes a finite time for the mixture to combust and thus reach peak pressure. If the spark is timed to occur at exactly TDC, the piston will already have travelled some way down the cylinder before peak pressure is reached. 
Again, the engine designer exploits the ineffective crank angle to increase efficiency. Ignition is timed to occur just before TDC on the compression stroke. Combustion is well under way by the time the piston begins its downward movement on the power stroke. 
In fact, combustion is completed, and maximum pressure produced, just as the piston leaves the period of ineffective crank 
Just before TDC TDC Just after TDC 
angle on the down power stroke -about 6-12° after TDC. This increases peak pressure and maximises the power generated on the power stroke. 

If this were allowed to happen, the maximum power produced by 
When the spark is timed to occur before TDC the ignition is said to the engine would reduce markedly with increased RPM. 

be "advanced". 

To overcome the problem, the ignition is further advanced as the 
While the rate of burning remains relatively constant, the speed at RPM increases. 

which the piston travels does not. At higher engine revolutions the piston is moving so rapidly that, if nothing is done to alter the timing of the spark, it will have already completed a significant portion of the power stroke before peak pressure is achieved. 

Piston Engine Principles of Operation 

Ignition Timing continued 
Likewise, as engine speed reduces, the ignition must be retarded. If it were not, in the extreme case, peak pressure might be achieved before the piston reaches the top of its travel. Not only would this be highly inefficient but it would also impose huge and potentially damaging forces on the engine components. It could even force the crankshaft to reverse its direction of rotation. There is a real risk of this happening during the very slow RPM associated with engine starting. During start the ignition is usually retarded to around TDC. 
These modifications to the theoretical cycle can be graphically displayed by the full timing diagram shown here. This relates piston movement, valve operation and ignition to the angular rotation of crankshaft. As stated earlier, the angles shown in the figure are representative only. Each engine design will have its own particular timing values. 
TDC f

Induction -Compression'Ct Ignition -Combustion -Power -Exhaust 
Inlet valve closes Exhaust valve opens 




Lesson 28 
Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 
AGK28 

Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 
ft+IHfh!o 
Multi Cylinder Engines 
We noted earlier that one ofthe factors determining engine power is the mass of mixture ignited in the cylinder. The greater the mass that can be combusted, the greater the power. 
The obvious way to increase mass would be to increase the size of the cylinder. But in the four-stroke cycle power is produced for only 25% of the time. The other three strokes represent power that must be used for "housekeeping" tasks. 
In practice cylinder size is increased but, more importantly multiple cylinders are used. Multiple cylinder designs have another benefit -they produce smoother power delivery. Four stroke aero-engines normally have at least four cylinders. 
A four cylinder engine is designed so that each cylinder is on a different stroke, ensuring that a power stroke is occurring at all times. 
Because a complete otto cycle takes two revolutions of the crankshaft, 720°, the firing interval of an engine is found by dividing 720° by the number of cylinders. A six cylinder engine would produce a power stroke every 120° of crankshaft rotation. 

Classification of Engines 
Engines can be classified according to their design characteristics. Most commonly by the: 
¦ 
Number of cylinders. 

¦ 
Cylinder arrangement. 

¦ 
Method of cooling. 

¦ 
Type of fuel and air induction system. 

¦ 
Propeller drive arrangement. 

¦ 
Some of the more common engine arrangements are described on the following pages. 



Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 
ft.iiflo 
In-Line Engines 
The cylinders are positioned in line. These engines can be air or 
r
liquid cooled. The number of cylinders is often restricted to four or 
six to ensure adequate air cooling and to limit the overall length of the engine. 
In-line engines are often inverted to provide greater propeller tip clearance with the ground. This can give rise to problems with oil pooling in the cylinders. 


Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 
ft+itfto 
Radial Engines 
As the name suggests, in a radial engine the cylinders are arranged radially around a central crankshaft. Radial engine designs have the advantage of being short, and offer a better power to weight ratio than other engine arrangements. 
Radial engines require an odd number of cylinders, to maintain a smooth power output by firing every other cylinder in order. A five­cylinder radial would fire in the order 1, 3, 5, 2, 4 and so on. The engine shown here has seven, arranged in a single bank. More cylinders could be added by using multiple banks. The ultimate radial piston engine design had 28 cylinders arranged in four banks of seven. 
Radial engines are air cooled and were often the preferred arrangement for larger aircraft. However, their relatively large frontal area can incur a significant drag penalty. Like inverted in­line engines, oil can pool in the lower cylinders when the engine is not running. 


Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 
The 'V' Engine 
The 'V' engine is effectively two in-line engines, set at an angle to each other and joined by a single crankshaft. This arrangement allows the designer to increase the number of cylinders, without increasing the engine's overall length, and representing a dramatic saving in weight due to the much shorter crankshaft than an in-line engine with the same number ofcylinders. 

Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 
ftiiifto 
Horizontally Opposed Engines 
Horizontally opposed, or "flat" engines are the most common multi cylinder arrangement used in light aircraft. The cylinders and pistons are arranged either side of a common crankshaft, offset from their opposite number. 

This arrangement produces a short, rigid engine that sits easily within a streamlined nacelle, so reducing drag. Four, six and eight cylinder arrangements are common. They are usually air cooled but some designs may have liquid cooled cylinder heads. The internal arrangement is shown here. 



Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 
Major Components of a Spark Ignition Engine Cylinder and Cylinder Head 
The cylinder comprises two parts, the barrel and the head which are bolted together. A gasket between the two faces ensures a completely gas tight seal. The barrel is usually made of steel and the head of alloy. Air cooled engines have fins on the barrel and head to help to disperse heat. Liquid cooled engine have galleries incorporated within the casting to allow a flow of cooling liquid around the engine. 
Spark Plugs 
Aero-engines always incorporate two spark plugs per cylinder. This in-built redundancy increases safety. It also ensures more efficient combustion because the mixture is simultaneously ignited at either side of the cylinder. This produces a quicker and more even burn. 


Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 
ft.Mflo 
Pistons 
Aluminium alloy pistons fit tightly in the cylinder. The top of the piston is called the crown. The piston is tapered slightly towards the crown to allow for thermal expansion. The crown itself is shaped to ensure optimum combustion conditions. The lower part of the piston is called the skirt. 
Compression rings are fitted around the top of the piston to prevent gases from escaping around the skirt. They are made from centrifugally spun cast iron. Carbon in the cast iron makes the rings self lubricating and the natural springiness of the material ensures a gas tight seal. 
Oil control rings are used to ensure that oil is spread evenly over the inner surface of the cylinder. An oil scraper ring is fitted to the 


piston skirt to draw excess oil back into the crankcase.  
Connecting Rod  Most aero engines have connecting rods and piston pins made  
The piston is connected to the crankshaft by a connecting rod. A  from steel aluminium alloys or titanium are also used for weight  
gudgeon pin, also known as a piston pin, connects the rod to the  saving in modern engines.  
piston at the "small end". The rod is attached to the crank pin of  
the crankshaft at the "big end". The connecting rod is usually 'H'  
shaped in cross-section for extra strength and lower weight.  

Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 

Crankshafts 
Crankshaft
A crankshaft lies between the two halves of the crankcase and is 
2 x Throw = Stroke

supported in bearing journals. Shell type main bearings are used --I to minimise friction. 
___ --~-------­
Crankshafts need to be very strong and are made from heavy 
Balance weight 

steel alloys. They are sometimes hollowed to save weight and to Crankpin
Crankweb 
allow cooling, lubricating oil to flow through them. 
The distance between the centre of the crankshaft journal and the centre of the crank pin is known as the crank throw. 
The amount of crank throw determines the distance the piston moves up and down in its cylinder. In half a revolution i.e. from TDC to BDC or from BDC to TDC, the piston will move by two throws. The piston will move twice the distance of the crank throw. This distance is known as the stroke. 
Reducing the stroke saves weight because the cylinder, connecting rod and crank throw are all shortened and therefore have less mass. This is why aircraft engines tend to be short stroked. 


Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 

Crankshafts continued 
Crankshaft
Counterweights are used to counteract the unbalancing effect of 
2 x Throw = Stroke 

--Ithe piston and connecting rod. 
The crankshaft is designed to permit a particular cylinder firing 
___ --~-------­
order. A typical firing order for a four cylinder engine would be 
Balance weight 

1,3,4,2. Alternating the firing order in this way reduces the Crankpin
Crankweb 
stresses on the crankshaft. 
The crankshaft, connecting rods and pistons are collectively known as the "crank assembly". 
Camshafts 
A camshaft is driven through gears by the crankshaft. The camshaft always rotates at half the speed of the engine crankshaft and operates the valves. 


Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 
Crankcase 
Tacho drive 

The crankcase forms the main structural element of the engine. Vacuum pump mounting pad Its two halves are cast from a light, strong alloy such as Crankcase breather~ ( 
Oil pump 
magnesium. 
The main rotating assemblies, the crankshaft and camshaft, are mounted in the crankcase and supported by bearings. Internal passages within the crankcase allow lubricating oil to flow to the bearings. In some cases the crankcase also serves as the oil reservoir. A crankcase breather pipe vents excess internal air pressure to atmosphere. 

The crankcase provides mounting points for Magneto Magneto 
¦ the cylinders, 
Oil sumpFuel pump 
¦ 
the engine itself, to attach it to the airframe 

¦ 
an accessory gearbox. 


Fuel, oil, ignition, hydraulic and pneumatic systems are driven from the accessory gearbox. The engine starter motor is sometimes also fitted to the gearbox. 

Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 


Valves and Valve Gear  
The Valves  
The inlet and exhaust valves are poppet valves. They are usually  
mounted in the cylinder head. The valves close under spring  
pressure and are opened by the camshaft via the valve operating  
gear. The inlet valve is normally larger than the exhaust valve.  
The poppet valves are made from a special steel alloy designed to  
withstand the very high thermal and mechanical stresses imposed  
by high speed, high temperature operation. The valve seat is  
carefully machined to ensure a gas tight seal at the port.  
To assist cooling, the exhaust valve is hollowed and partially filled  
with sodium. At high temperatures the sodium melts and flows up  
and down the stem transferring heat from the valve face to the  
valve stem.  
Helical springs located around the valve provide the force to hold  To achieve this, the springs are different diameters, one sitting  
the valve face firmly closed against the valve seat. The springs  inside the other. To prevent mutual interference they are counter  
are retained by a cup and tapered collets.  wound, meaning they are coiled in opposite directions. Counter  
Valve bounce  winding also serves to minimise any tendency of the valve to rotate in operation.  
When a spring vibrates at its resonant frequency it loses its ability  
to hold the valve closed: this phenomenon is known as valve  
bounce. Valve bounce can be eliminated by fitting two springs,  
each having different resonant frequencies.  

Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 
Valve Gear 
Valve gear is the collective term used to describe the components that operate the valves. A hinged lever, the rocker arm, moves down. This forces the valve down, against the pressure of its springs, to open the port. When the rocker arm moves up, spring pressure returns the valve to its fully seated, closed position. 
The rocker arm is operated by a push rod that rests on a camshaft driven by the crankshaft. The profile ofthe cams on the camshaft is carefully set to ensure that the valves open and close at precisely the right point in the four-stroke sequence. 
A tappet is fitted between the camshaft and the push rod. This helps to translate smoothly the movement of the cam into the reciprocating motion of the push rod. The assembly is adjusted so that when the valve is fully closed a small gap exists between the top of the valve stem and the rocker pad. This "tappet clearance" allows for thermal expansion. 
The correct tappet clearance ensures that the valves close completely at all operating temperatures. An excessively large clearance will prevent the valve from opening fully. An excessively small clearance may prevent the valve from closing properly at high temperatures. 
Rocker arm 
Rocker pad 
Clearance Adjusting nuts 
Valve stem PushRod 
Valve seat Tappet 

Incorrect tappet clearance can cause a significant reduction in performance. Many modern engines are now fitted with hydraulic tappets which automatically adjust themselves to cater for thermal expansion. They operate using engine oil as their hydraulic medium, and require no pre-set tappet clearance. 


Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 
Engine Power 

Air is the working fluid of the engine. The more that can be induced into the cylinder, the more power the engine can produce. 
"Normally aspirated" engines rely on the difference between atmospheric pressure and cylinder pressure to draw the mixture into the cylinder, but atmospheric pressure reduces with altitude. At height, less mixture will be drawn into the cylinders so the engine will produce less power. This limitation can be partially overcome by forcing air into the cylinder using some form of mechanical compressor. Engines which use such systems are described as being "supercharged". 
The pressure of the mixture is measured in the inlet manifold, just before it is introduced into the cylinder. This value is displayed on a Manifold Absolute Pressure (MAP) gauge. The unit of pressure normally used is inches of mercury, (in Hg). 
Engine Take-off idle 


Engine 

Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 
Engine Power continued 
MAP directly correlates with the average pressure produced by combustion (MEP) and is therefore a good indicator of the power being produced by the engine. The pilot controls MAP and therefore cylinder pressure with the throttle lever. The lever operates the throttle valve (butterfly valve) which controls the amount of air or mixture delivered to the engine. 
When the engine is stopped the MAP gauge displays atmospheric pressure which, in ISA conditions, is 29.92 in Hg. 
When the engine is started the MAP will drop. On a normally aspirated engine MAP would always indicate slightly less than atmospheric pressure, even with the throttle fully open when running. A supercharged engine can produce higher than atmospheric MAP. 
Engine Take-off idle 
Engine stationary 

Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 

Calculating Power 
Power is the rate of doing work and is shown by the formula 
P _ Force x Distance ower -Time 
Pressure 'P' Area of piston 'N 
The force produced on the piston is equal to the pressure ' P' 
Length of stroke 'L' 
(MEP) in the cylinder during the power stroke acting on the area 'A' of the piston crown. The distance the piston moves is the length of stroke 'L'. 
Distance over time is speed, which in this case equates to RPM. Because, on a single piston engine, only one power stroke is produced for every two revolutions of the crankshaft the RPM must be divided by 2 to give the effective number of power strokes 'E'. 
Multiplying these factors together gives the theoretical power produced in the cylinder. If the engine has multiple cylinders an additional factor 'N' for the number of cylinders must be applied. A mnemonic to help remember the five factors is PLANE. 


Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 
Calculating Power continued  
The length of stroke of the engine, piston area and its number of cylinders are all fixed in the design, but the pressure 'P' depends on MAP.  Pressure 'P'  Area of piston 'N  
For a fixed pitch propeller, rotational speed 'E' changes as the throttle is moved. In variable pitch propeller systems, RPM and 'E' are no longer solely controlled by the throttle. In this case power is determined jointly by the throttle and the propeller control lever.  Length of stroke 'L'  
MAP gauges are seldom fitted to engines with fixed pitch propellers but must be fitted to engines with variable pitch propellers.  
Remember that the theoretical power produced in the engine is not the power that is delivered to the propeller. Some power must be used to overcome internal friction. The remainder is delivered  
to the propeller shaft.  

Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 


For engines equipped with fixed pitch propellers the RPM indicator (Tachometer) broadly corresponds to the power being produced because increased RPM equates to increased power. Pressure 'P' Area of piston 'A' 
On variable pitch propeller systems power is a function of MAP 

! Length of stroke 'L' and RPM, so both must be monitored. twice throw of crank 
To avoid overstressing the engine, propeller RPM must be increased before maximum power is selected with the throttle lever. 

Larger or more sophisticated aircraft have dedicated power indicator gauges. These "torque gauges" measure engine torque which is the turning force exerted by the engine on the propeller shaft. Torque is produced when a force is applied at a distance to a turning point. The force comes from the pressure 'P' acting on the Torque is measured at the gearbox between the engine and the area 'A' ofthe piston. The distance from the turning point is the propeller. throw ofthe crank shown as 'd' which equates to half the length of the stroke 'L'. This means that the PLA of the PLANE formula can be replaced by torque. 
'N' represents the number of cylinders, leaving the last factor 'E' which is proportional to RPM. So, engine power can be expressed as Torque x RPM. 
Torque x RPM = Power 

Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 
Piston Engine Efficiency 

Thermal Efficiency 
The greatest losses occur because of the engine's poor thermal efficiency. Thermal efficiency is expressed as the ratio of the work done by the engine to the mechanical equivalent of the heat energy released by combusting the fuel. 
A modern piston engine is about 33% thermally efficient. Most of the heat energy is lost to the atmosphere in the exhaust. The remainder heats up the engine components. Thermal efficiency is independent of altitude but increases with increased compression ratio. 


Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 
Compression Ratio 
When the piston is at TDC the fuel/air mixture is compressed into a very small space between the top of the piston and the top of the cylinder. This is known as the clearance volume. 
When the piston is at BOC the volume of space containing the mixture the "total volume" is very much larger. The difference between the clearance volume and the total volume is called the swept volume. The compression ratio is the ratio of total volume to clearance volume. 
For aero engines, compression ratios typically fall between 7:1 and 9:1. High compression ratios improve thermal efficiency. However, there is a practical limit to the maximum achievable compression ratio. If it is too high, the rise in temperature caused by compression can lead to detonation which is discussed later. 
The swept volume multiplied by the number of cylinders gives the "displacement". In other words: 
Displacement= piston area x stroke x number of cylinders 
To compensate for their shorter stroke, aero engines have a relatively large piston area. A "squared" or "square cage" engine describes a design where the cylinder diameter equals the stroke. 

Clearance Total Sweptvolume volume volume 
.. 
lTDC BDC 

Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 

Volumetric efficiency is the ratio of the mass of the mixture induced into the cylinder to the mass of air (at standard temperature and pressure) which would otherwise fill the swept volume. 
Increased volumetric efficiency results in increased engine power. The most obvious way to increase volumetric efficiency is to force more mixture into the cylinders by supercharging. 
For a normally aspirated piston engine, three main factors influence volumetric efficiency: 
¦ 
The ease with which the mixture can enter the cylinder. 

¦ 
The density of the air. (Affected by altitude, temperature and humidity) 

¦ 
The ease with which the exhaust gases can leave the cylinder. 


Inlet flow will depend on the smoothness of the inner surfaces of the inlet manifold, the shape ofthe manifold itself, the efficiency of operation and timing of the inlet valve, and any restrictions caused by the throttle butterfly valve. 
Outlet flow will depend on the design of the exhaust system and the operation and timing ofthe exhaust valve. Backpressure in the exhaust pipes will hinder the flow of exhaust gases from the cylinders. 

On a normally aspirated engine, Volumetric Efficiency (VE) increases with: 
¦ 
Altitude: because the reduced air density results in a drop in exhaust back pressure, which increases mass flow into the 

cylinder, and therefore density in the cylinder, but only ifthe MAP remains constant. Note if the MAP does not remain constant then the VE will reduce. 

¦ 
RPM: because of the increased momentum of the gases. 



A modern normally aspirated piston engine typically achieves a volumetric efficiency of about 80%. 
Piston Engine Design and Efficiency 

The Effect of Volumetric Efficiency on Engine Power 
In normally aspirated engines the maximum obtainable MAP will reduce with altitude because of the reducing atmospheric pressure. Maximum power will be obtained at low pressure altitudes and power will reduce with altitude. 
The improvement in volumetric efficiency caused by reduced exhaust back pressure is evident in flight when using a normally aspirated engine and a variable pitch propeller. 
If the aircraft is climbed initially at less than full power, for example at max continuous power, both MAP and RPM can be kept constant using the throttle and RPM levers. Under these circumstances the power available would initially increase with altitude until the throttle is fully opened and the selected MAP value can no longer be obtained. 
Specific Fuel Consumption 
The overall fuel efficiency of a piston engine is measured by its Specific Fuel Consumption (SFC). SFC is the mass of fuel required to produce a given amount of power for a given period of time. The SI units of SFC are kilograms per kilowatt hour. A low value of SFC indicates a more fuel efficient engine. 
Max 

Max power reduces
power 
with increased altitude •••••••••••••··········· 
Engine 
Climb at constant Power increase power 
MAP and RPM due to reduced(MAP) 
until throttle is exhaust back pressure fully open 
Sea level 1000 ft 2000 ft 3000 ft 4000 ft 5000 ft 6000 ft Altitude 



Lesson 29 
Piston Engine Lubrication and Cooling 
AGK 29 

Piston Engine Lubrication and Cool ing 
ft.ih·l o 
Engine Lubrication Systems 
The moving parts in an engine must be lubricated with oil to reduce friction and wear. This is achieved by injecting or spraying a thin film of oil between them. The outside layers of oil cling to the metal surfaces allowing a central layer of molecules to move effortlessly in an oil "sandwich". 
As well as its primary lubricating function, engine oil has a number of secondary functions. 
Cooling. Oil helps to cool the engine by absorbing heat and dispersing it to atmosphere. 
Cleaning. Oil cleans the engine by removing deposits and metal flakes which are then trapped by an oil filter. 
Protection. Oil protects the components from corrosion. 

Hydraulic operations. Oil can be used as the hydraulic medium Low pressure could be due to a poor pump, or a low oil quantity. Ato operate valve gear and variable pitch propellers. 

low quantity would also run at a higher temperature as the amount 
Engine oil temperature and pressure are both very important of oil is insufficient for adequate cooling of the engine. 

indicators of the condition of the engine. There is a relationship between oil pressure, temperature, and quantity. Pressure is achieved by the work of the pump, and temperature is controlled through the oil cooling system. 

Piston Engine Lubrication and Cooling 
ft+i.·l o 
Aero Engine Oils 
An important characteristic of oil is its viscosity. Viscosity is the resistance of the fluid to flow. It reduces with increased temperature. 
High viscosity oil makes the engine more difficult to turn over but guarantees a good film in the bearings. Low viscosity oil makes the engine easier to turn over. But if it is too low, the oil film can break down, allowing metal to come into contact with metal. 
Aero engines normally use a mineral oil designed specifically to maintain an acceptable level of viscosity over the full range of operating temperatures. A numbering system is used to indicate viscosity the higher the number, the higher the viscosity. 
Aero engine oil must 
¦ 
maintain suitable viscosity over a wide range of temperatures and pressures, 

¦ 
have a low evaporation rate, 

¦ 
inhibit corrosion, 

¦ 
not react with the materials with which it comes into contact, 

¦ 
discourage the formation of sludge. 



To meet these requirements, additives are introduced to the base mineral oil. Oil containing additives is known as "compound oil". It may be identified by letters preceding the viscosity number. For example W80 orAD100. 
"Straight" oil has no additives and is used on new engines to reduce the running-in time. 
Some piston aero engines use modern synthetic multi-grade oils. Synthetic oil is produced from chemical compounds which don't occur in crude oil. 
No oil can indefinitely resist the effects of operating in such a harsh environment. Eventually irreversible damage is caused by oxidisation, the corrosive by-products of combustion, water vapour contamination and the repeated mechanical shearing which occurs in the lubricating film. This is why it is essential to change the oil according to the schedule laid down by the engine manufacturer. 
As well as incurring damage some oil is normally lost through burning. Nevertheless, the oil level should be checked regularly to ensure that oil consumption isn't excessive. Abnormal or excessive oil burning may be indicated by blue or grey smoke in the exhaust. Worn piston rings, cylinder or piston can all result in oil being burned in the combustion chamber. 
Piston Engine Lubrication and Cool ing 
ft+IH·lo 
Types of Lubrication System 
Engines may be classified according to the way in which the engine oil supply is stored. There are two methods: the "dry" and "wet sump" systems. 
In a dry sump system oil is stored in a tank mounted remotely from the engine. In a wet sump system the oil is stored in the bottom of the crankcase, the "sump". 


Piston Engine Lubrication and Cool ing 

Dry Sump Systems 
Oil is drawn from the tank by an engine driven pump. A suction filter is fitted just before the pump. The pump forces oil through a second, high-pressure, filter to various strategically placed jets and drillings servicing the major lubrication points. 
The pump provides considerably more oil pressure than is normally necessary. This ensures that sufficient pressure can be guaranteed even under extreme conditions. A pressure relief valve regulates the system pressure. 
Highly loaded points, such as the big end bearings, are fed with high-pressure oil at about 60-70 PSI. The oil is injected at the crankshaft main bearings and passes into a gallery inside the crankshaft to emerge at the big end bearings. As it leaves the big end bearings some of the oil is flung onto the cylinder walls. 


Lightly loaded components such as the camshaft are fed with low­pressure oil via a pressure-reducing valve. 
The oil then falls to the sump, where it is collected by a scavenge pump. This pumps the oil back to the oil tank, via an oil cooler. The scavenge pump is more powerful than the high-pressure pump, to ensure that oil doesn't pool in the sump. 

Piston Engine Lubrication and Cooling 
ft.iff·l o 
Dry Sump System Components Oil Tank 
The oil tank contains a reserve of oil to allow for fluctuations in demand, thermal expansion, minor leaks and frothing caused by aeration. 
Oil returns from the engine via the oil return line (or "scavenge line") and spills onto a de-aerator plate. This helps to separate out any air bubbles which may be suspended in the oil. The air escapes to the sump via a vent, and eventually to atmosphere via an oil breather. 
The de-aerated oil drops into the tank which contains baffles to prevent the fluid from slopping and surging during manoeuvres. 
Most oil tank designs incorporate a hot well. The hot well is a perforated metal cylinder covering the outlet to the pressure pump. During starting, when the oil is cold and at its most viscous, oil is drawn first from the hot well. The cold viscous oil in the main part of the tank can only flow very slowly through the perforations into the hot well. Consequently the hot well tends to refill with hot oil returning from the engine. This quickly establishes a good circulation of less viscous oil during and immediately after start. 
Eventually all the oil in the tank warms to operating temperature and is able to flow freely through the hot well. 

Coarse Filter 
Coarse filters are fitted before the pressure and scavenge pumps and are respectively known as the suction and scavenge filters. The filters clean the oil by trapping any dirt, metal particles and carbon carried by the oil. The filters are fitted before the pumps to protect the pumps from damage. They are removed during servicing and the contents examined by engineers to asses the wear on the engine components. 
Magnetic Plugs (Chip Detectors) 
Removable magnetic plugs ("chip detectors") are fitted in the oil return lines. Ferrous particles from the engine or gearbox are caught by the magnets. Analysis of these particles can provide a very accurate indication of wear and impending component failure. This analysis is used for engine condition monitoring. 
Piston Engine Lubrication and Cool ing 
ft+M·-lo 
Oil Pump (Engine Driven Pump) 
The oil pumps are engine driven and normally use a spur gear system. The scavenge pump usually has twice the capacity of the pressure pump. Pump speed varies with engine RPM so pump output will increase at higher engine speeds and has to be regulated by a pressure relief valve. 
Relatively low oil pressure, especially at high RPM, may indicate a worn oil pressure pump. 
Pressure Relief Valve 
The pressure relief valve is fitted in parallel to the pump to regulate its output pressure. Excessive output pressure causes the spring-loaded valve to open and dump oil to the suction side of the pump. 
Pressure Filter 
The fine high-pressure filter removes very small particles that might otherwise damage the bearing surfaces. The filter is made of very fine felt, reinforced by wire gauze. The felt surface is deeply corrugated to increase the filtration area. A bypass valve is fitted to ensure that sufficient (unfiltered) oil continues to lubricate the engine if the filter becomes blocked or clogged. 

Air Cooled Oil Cooling 
An oil cooler is fitted in the scavenge line between the scavenge pump and the oil tank. It comprises a matrix of small galleries with fins attached. Air is drawn through the intake and passes through the matrix absorbing the heat from the oil and exhausting it overboard. An anti-surge valve allows oil to bypass the cooler whilst it is cold and viscous, or in the event that the oil cooler becomes blocked. 
Shutters are sometimes used to control the amount of air passing over the oil cooler. These manually operated doors restrict the flow of cooling air and so prevent the oil from being cooled excessively. 
Excessive cooling can cause "oil coring" in which the oil tends to congeal in the matrix and block it. If this occurs the anti surge valve will operate sending un-cooled oil directly back to the oil tank. The result will be a sharp rise in oil temperature that can only be corrected by closing the shutters! 
In a dry sump system the oil cooler is fitted in the return line and in wet sump systems the cooler is normally fitted in the pressure supply to the engine. 
Piston Engine Lubrication and Cool ing 
ft+H·lo 
Oil Temperature Gauge 
An oil temperature gauge measures the temperature of the oil in the supply line after the cooler and before the pressure pump. 

Oil Pressure Gauge 245 115
An oil pressure gauge measures oil pressure at the outlet of the pressure pump. Cold oil is more viscous and results in a higher 
~ .20)1~ p
pressure reading for a given RPM than oil at normal operating 
M~ 
'so~: 5
temperature. 
p IUu .,.. 2d 
\ "'" s
I
Oil pressure should begin to indicate within 30 seconds of engine 
75 OIL 0 
starting. Pressure, temperature and quantity are of course linked. Insufficient quantity of oil means that the remaining oil is working harder to cool and lubricate. This in turn raises the temperature and reduces the pressure of the oil. Several applied knowledge exam questions have appeared in recent years testing your knowledge of that relationship. 

Piston Engine Lubrication and Cool ing 
ft++h·-lo 
Wet Sump Systems 
Wet sump systems use the same components as dry sump systems except that there is no scavenge pump, scavenge line or oil tank. Instead the oil is stored in the sump, which is a reservoir formed by part ofthe crank case. 
As well as pressurised oil feeds, the action of the crankshaft splashing through the oil helps to lubricate the working surfaces. This is known as splash lubrication. 
Comparison of Wet and Dry Sump Systems 
The principal advantage of a dry sump system is that the oil is contained in a separate oil tank. This ensures a supply offiltered and cooled oil to the pump under all flight conditions. By contrast the oil in a wet sump system disperses around the engine during inverted flight. This can very quickly lead to oil starvation. 
Because the wet sump system uses splash lubrication, excessive oiling can occur at high RPM. Furthermore, the oil used for splash lubrication hasn't been filtered or cooled. 
In a wet sump system, depending on the shape of the crankcase, it may be necessary to carry a greater quantity of oil than is necessary for lubrication to ensure an adequate supply to the oil pump. 

Checking the Oil Level 
In a dry sump system the oil tank quantity must be checked immediately after the engine is shut down. This is because oil in the tank can, after a while, start to drain back into the engine and give a false low reading. 
In a wet sump system the oil level in the sump should be checked about 20 minutes after shut down to allow time for all the oil to drain back to the sump. 
Hydraulicing 
Oil leaking into the engine and particularly into the engine cylinders can lead to a problem known as hydraulicing. This usually only occurs in inverted and radial engines. Oil can pool in the inverted cylinders between the piston crown and the cylinder head. Any attempt to start in this condition can cause severe damage as the piston forces the incompressible oil against the cylinder head. 
To prevent damage from hydraulicing it is common practice to briefly remove the spark plugs from the lower cylinders to allow the oil to drain out. At the very least the engine should be turned manually before starting to check for signs of hydraulicing. 
Piston Engine Lubrication and Cool ing 
ft+M·-lo 


Engine Cooling Systems 
Lubricating oil contributes significantly to engine cooling, but oil alone is insufficient to dissipate all the heat. An additional cooling method is needed. 
Piston engines can either be air or liquid cooled. Liquid cooling is inherently more efficient, but spark ignition aero-engines are usually air-cooled to save weight and to reduce the number of working components. 
In an air cooled engine, an air inlet directs air over the engine. Deep fins on the cylinders increase the external surface area available for cooling. Cylinder baffles control the flow of air to ensure that each cylinder is evenly cooled. 
(increase cooling)

Hot air exhausted'·-.: to atmosphere after cooling engine 
Piston Engine Lubrication and Cool ing 
ft+it·h·lo 
Temperature Measurement 
To operate efficiently the engine is designed to run at high temperature -but not so high as to cause fuel detonation and unacceptable thermal stresses on the engine. 
The highest temperatures occur around the cylinder head which is why cylinder head temperature is often measured and used as an indicator of engine health. 
Cylinder Head Temperature (CHT) sensors may be fitted to all the cylinders but usually only one is attached to the (normally) hottest, cylinder. The hottest cylinder is usually the rearmost, as it is the last to receive the flow of cooling air. CHT is measured by a thermocouple which requires no electrical supply. The thermocouple produces a voltage which varies directly with temperature. This is used to drive a CHT display in the cockpit. 


Piston Engine Lubrication and Cooling 
ft.iihi-l o 
Temperature Control 
During normal operation, cylinder head temperature is affected 
by: 
¦ 
The amount of power being produced. 

¦ 
The aircraft's speed (i.e. the mass flow of cooling air). 

¦ 
The temperature of the cooling air. 

¦ 
The ratio of the mixture. 


Of these four factors the pilot can control three. Mass flow is related to the aircraft's forward speed. The heat generated by the engine depends on the power produced and the mixture is controlled by the mixture lever. 
A "lean" or "weak" mixture will cause an increase in CHT because it burns more slowly and has more time to transfer heat to the components. 

The engine is most likely to overheat at low speed and high power, for example during an extended climb. It is equally important to ensure that the engine is not overcooled. Overcooling can result in thermal shock which can cause cylinders to crack. Overcooling is most likely to occur at high speed and lower power settings. 
Some engine installations are equipped with automatic or manually operated cowl flaps to regulate the flow of cooling air to the engine. The cowl flaps are opened for a full power climb and closed for a low power descent -for example in a high speed descent at idle power. 


Lesson 30 
Piston Engine Ignition Systems 

AGK 30 

Piston Engine Ignition Systems 
ftiih\·lo 
Starting and Ignition Systems 
Modern piston engines are equipped with an electric starter motor powered by the battery. During the start sequence the motor drives the engine, either via a gearbox or by engaging a toothed gear on the engine flywheel. 

As soon as the engine starts, an overrun clutch disengages the drive from the motor. An amber starter warning lamp illuminates whilst the drive gear is engaged. If the light remains on for more than 30 seconds after engine start the starter motor may have Belt driven 
alternator
failed to disengage. The engine must be shut down. 
As the engine begins to rotate it drives one or more magnetos which generate High Tension electricity to power the spark plugs. 

Piston Engine Ignition Systems 
Ignition 
The purpose of the ignition system is to provide sparks of sufficient strength and duration at precisely the right moment in the cycle to ensure efficient combustion. 
The critical components of the ignition system are duplicated, thus ensuring that any single failure does not result in a total loss of engine power. Aero engines usually use engine-driven magnetos to generate the high voltages required for the spark plugs. Some modern aero engines use a combination of one magneto and one electronic system, such as plasma ignition. 
ft+i.i·lo 
Left hand Right hand cylinders cylinders 
Left or No1 magneto Right or No2 magneto fires upper spark plugs LH fires upper spark plugs RH cylinders and lower spark cylinders and lower spark plugs RH cylinders plugs LH cylinders 
Piston Engine Ignition Systems 
Principle of Magneto Operation 
The magneto is an AC generator, transformer and distribution system providing high voltage current to the spark plugs. It is independent of the aircraft battery and electrical system and, like all electrical generators, works on the principle that current will be caused to flow in a coil of wire when it is passed between the poles of a magnet. 
The generator section of the magneto comprises a rotating permanent magnet surrounded by a U-shaped stator made of soft iron. A primary winding, also called the Low Tension (LT) circuit is wound round the stator and comprises a few turns of thick wire. A secondary winding, also called the High Tension (HT) circuit is then wound over it. The secondary winding contains many turns affine wire and so acts as a step up transformer. As a result, any electrical flow in the primary winding will induce a higher voltage in the secondary winding, albeit at lower current. 
The permanent magnets are rotated by a drive from the engine. As they rotate they induce a alternating current in the primary and secondary windings. Both windings also produce a magnetic field that surrounds them. 
ft+IFf·io 


Piston Engine Ignition Systems 
Principle of Magneto Operation 2 

The primary winding circuit is continuously broken and remade by Th Primaty and 
Fl111 Secondary a contact breaker. This has two effects: Windl1191 
¦ 
It converts the continuous flow of alternating current into a series of pulses. 

¦ 
The collapse of the magnetic field around the primary winding produces a surge of energy in the secondary winding. 


The overall result is a series of very high voltage low current 
SpnPlugl 
pulses of electricity which are fed to a distributor and then through High Tension (HT) leads to the spark plugs. 
The HT leads and sometimes the spark plugs are screened to reduce electrical interference. 
The collapsing magnetic field caused when the contact breaker points open has one undesirable effect. It induces a current in the primary winding which is sufficiently strong to produce arcing at the contact breaker points. This arcing can damage the breaker points. A capacitor or condenser is fitted in parallel with the contact breaker to prevent arcing and to provide a rapid collapse of the primary current. It also helps to ensure that the highest possible voltage is induced in the secondary circuit. 
Piston Engine Ignition Systems 
Principle of Magneto Operation 3 
The distributor distributes the electrical pulses to each spark plug in the appropriate sequence. It comprises a rotor arm driven by the engine and a distribution block which contains a series of electrodes each linked to a separate spark plug. HT current from the magneto is fed to the rotor and passes to each spark plug in turn as the rotor comes into contact with its associated electrode. 
The HT current is sufficiently large to jump the gap between the spark plug's electrodes, creating a powerful spark as it does so. The spark occurs at the spark plug just as the contact breaker points open. 
The engine drives the contact breaker and the distributor rotor via a spindle. So the speed of the rotor and the speed of operation of the contact breaker vary directly with engine RPM. The spindle always rotates at half the crankshaft RPM. 
ft+ifff·io 


Piston Engine Ignition Systems 
Controlling the Ignition System 
Each magneto is controlled by its own ignition switch. The switch isolates the magneto's ignition circuit by connecting the primary circuit to Earth. In this condition its is said to be "grounded". The ignition switch lead is called the 'P' lead. 
The ignition switch must be closed to earth the circuit. When the switch is open, the ignition circuit is live and current is free to flow in the primary circuit whenever the contact breaker is closed. 
This switching method works in the opposite sense to a normal electric switching system to provide fail-safe protection in flight. With this design, a break in the switch's wiring will not cause the ignition system to fail. 
The system is anything but fail-safe on the ground because a disconnected wire in the switch circuit may result in a permanently live ignition circuit! 
There is a further problem with this arrangement. Most light aircraft use a single-pole, earth-return electrical system. This means that it only needs one disconnected switch wire to touch any part of the airframe for the magneto to switch off. 
ft+Milo 

Additional Advantage of Two Spark Plugs 
The additional spark plug in each cylinder helps to accelerate the combustion process because the flame front spreads out from both plugs simultaneously. This causes a quicker rise to peak cylinder pressure and thus a noticeable increase in power. This is why engine RPM drops slightly when each magneto is switched off during the pre-flight magneto check. 
Piston Engine Ignition Systems 
Magneto Checks 
The ignition system is completely duplicated, so both halves of the circuit must be checked. The pre-flight magneto check comprises two elements: the "mag drop" check and the "dead cut" check. 
The "mag drop" check is carried out twice, but at different power settings and for different reasons. The first check is carried out just after starting the engine with the RPM set at about 1000-1200 RPM. Each magneto is switched off in turn. The RPM should drop but the engine should continue to run smoothly. This proves the operation of the magneto switches and confirms that, at low RPM, one magneto will keep the engine running. 
The second "mag drop" check is carried out at higher RPM, normally about 75% of maximum. Again each magneto is switched off in turn. During this check the RPM drop must fall within specific limits and the engine must continue to run smoothly. A successful check indicates that, if one magneto were to fail, engine power would not be significantly affected. 
A complete dead cut would indicate a failure of one half of the ignition circuit, whilst no drop in RPM would imply that one half of the ignition system is not being earthed. Excessive RPM drop and rough running indicates an ignition problem. 
ft.Hf·llo 

A drop of around 300-400 RPM accompanied by rough running is typical of a malfunctioning spark plug. 
A malfunctioning ignition switch could leave the circuit live after engine shut down, so it is essential to carry out a dead cut check before shutting down. With the throttle at idle, both ignition switches are briefly turned off. If the system is serviceable the engine will begin to shut down but will recover immediately the magnetos are switched back on. If a dead cut doesn't occur it's likely that at least one magneto is "live" -a potentially dangerous condition. 
Piston Engine Ignition Systems 
The Need for Pressurised Magnetos 
Magnetos rely to some extent on the insulating properties of air to isolate internal components. Consequently magnetos designed for high altitude operation are normally pressurised to reduce the possibility of internal arcing. 
Auxiliary Spark Augmentation 
The magneto's output voltage is directly proportional to its rotational speed. It is driven by the engine via a gearbox which increases its rotational speed to guarantee sufficient voltage is produced, even at idle RPM. 
During start, when the engine is turning very slowly, the system needs some help and, for reasons we discussed earlier in this chapter, it must also ensure that the spark is sufficiently retarded. There are three methods of achieving this. 
ft.f:ii/lo 

Impulse Magneto 
Smaller, lower powered, engines use an impulse coupling magneto on either or both magnetos. The coupling comprises a spring-loaded clutch mounted between the drive spindle from the engine and the magneto shaft. As the engine begins to rotate the drive spindle winds up the spring-loaded clutch. When the clutch releases the spring unwinds rapidly spinning the magneto much faster than the engine is turning it. 
This occurs once every half revolution of the engine and ensures that sufficiently strong sparks are generated, even when hand starting. The same mechanism also retards the ignition during its operation. 
Once the engine has started, pawls within the mechanism move out under centrifugal force to prevent the coupling from operating. 
Piston Engine Ignition Systems 
High Tension Booster Coil 
The output from the magneto can be augmented using a booster coil. High Tension booster coil systems are commonly used on larger engines. 
The HT booster coil induces a large current in a secondary winding by collapsing the magnetic field surrounding the primary winding. Current is fed from the aircraft battery to power the primary winding. A trembler interrupter in the coil interrupts the primary winding circuit to produce a continuous stream of high voltage impulses in the secondary (HT) circuit. 
This voltage is then fed to a trailing brush on the distributor rotor arm. The amount of trail is set to ensure the spark is sufficiently retarded for starting. This system is also known as the "shower of sparks" ignition system. Once the engine has started the HT booster coil is switched off. 
ft.M\lo 

Low Tension Booster Coil 
The Low Tension (LT) booster coil uses aircraft battery power to increase the output from the magneto. Boosted battery power is fed directly to the primary winding ofthe magneto itself to improve its slow speed power generation. 
In this system a second set of contact breaker points in the LT booster coil circuit ensure a sufficiently retarded spark. The LT booster coil is switched off once the engine has started. 
Piston Engine Ignition Systems  
Spark Plugs  
The High Tension (HT) leads from the distributor supply each spark plug with about 30 000 volts at relatively low current.  
The plug comprises an insulated electrode running through its centre and a smaller electrode attached to the base of the spark plug body. The main body of the plug is metal, and connects to earth when screwed into the cylinder. A small but precisely set gap separates the two electrodes. When HT voltage is applied to the centre electrode a strong spark is generated between the two electrodes. This ignites the fuel air mixture. The size of the gap is important and must be accurately set before the plug is installed. If it is too small the spark may be weak. If it is too large there may be no spark at all.  Body forms electrode  Spark jumps across gap Centre electrode If gap is blocked plug is said to be fouled  
Occasionally oil, carbon or lead deposits from the fuel can block the gap causing a failure to spark. This is known as plug 'fouling'.  
Spark plugs have a designated operating temperature range. Within this range the plug is designed to reduce the risk offouling. Fouling is much more likely to occur if a plug of the wrong temperature specification is fitted.  



Lesson 37 
Piston Engine Fuel 

AGK37 
Piston Engine Fuel 
ft.ihil o 
Piston Engine Fuel 
Characteristics of Aviation Gasoline (AVGAS) 
A piston engine relies on harnessing the energy released when fuel is burned with air. For this to be effective the fuel must have a number of characteristics: 
¦ 
It must contain a significant quantity of energy. 

¦ 
It must be able to form vapour-but not too readily. 

¦ 
It must be able to burn quickly but controllably, giving a manageable rise in pressure that can be efficiently translated into the movement of the pistons. 


The quantity of energy contained in the fuel is measured by its calorific value, which is the amount of heat obtained for a given mass of fuel. The specific gravity ofAVGAS is typically 0.72 at ISA and at sea level, which means that it is less dense than Jet A 1 (AVTUR) at around 0.8. 
The way in which the fuel burns depends upon a number of factors. For example, under optimum conditions, aviation gasoline burns rapidly but consistently with a flame rate (the speed at which the flame propagates) of about 60-80 ft per second. This produces the predictable and uniform rise in pressure which is used to drive the piston. 


Piston Engine Fuel 
Detonation 
Under abnormal conditions the mixture may detonate rather than burn. Detonation is the extremely rapid spontaneous combustion of part of the mixture after burning has begun. The result is a rapid, violent and uneven rise in pressure in the cylinder with flame rates in the order of 1000 ft per second. The shock of detonation can often be heard as a knocking sound within the engine. Detonation is often referred to as "knocking". 
Most of the energy produced by detonation is not absorbed by piston movement but is instead given up as heat and shock. Consequently power output reduces markedly and the cylinder temperature rises rapidly and unevenly, producing local hot spots and inflicting physical damage to the piston crowns. The engine runs rough. Prolonged detonation will eventually cause the piston crowns to fail under the load. 
ft+i.i·lo 

The four principal causes of detonation are: 
¦ 
Fuel with poor anti-knock qualities. 

¦ 
Incorrect (excessively weak) mixture ratio. 

¦ 
Anything that unduly raises the temperature or pressure of the mixture before it is burned (i.e. low RPM with high MAP). 

¦ 
High engine temperature. 


Piston Engine Fuel 
Pre-Ignition 
Detonation should not be confused with pre-ignition. Pre-ignition is the ignition ofthe mixture before the spark plug has fired. Detonation occurs after ignition. 
Pre-ignition is caused by local hot spots within the cylinder caused, for example, by small carbon deposits. It is most likely when the cylinder is excessively hot or excessively contaminated with carbon deposits. The primary cause of pre-ignition is an excessively weak mixture. The symptoms of pre-ignition are the same as for detonation: loss of power, rough running and overheating. Pre-ignition usually worsens with increased RPM whereas detonation usually reduces as RPM increase. 
Pre-ignition has one unique characteristic -the tendency for the engine to continue to run for a short period after the ignition has been turned off. This is called 'running on'. 
Controlling Detonation 
Modern aviation gasoline has very good anti-knock qualities produced by carefully controlling the hydrocarbon content of the fuel and by using additives. 
ft+IFf·io 

Octane Rating / Grade {Anti Knock) 
Fuel is assigned a number to indicate its resistance to detonation. The number is sometimes also known as the anti-knock value. 
The number indicates the percentages of the two pure spirits, iso­octane and heptane used to produce the same detonation characteristics of a particular fuel under test. Each has widely differing anti-knock characteristics. !so-octane has very good anti-knock qualities, heptane does not. For example an 87 octane fuel would have the same anti-knock qualities as a mixture of 87% iso-octane and 13% heptane. The higher the octane rating/grade of a fuel the higher its resistance to detonation. 
AVGAS normally has a two-figure octane rating which describes its anti-knock properties for weak and rich mixture settings respectively. AVGAS is normally rated at 100/130 or 115/145. The AVGAS specification is D Eng RD 2485. Octane numbers above 100 are called performance numbers. 
Piston Engine Fuel 
Additives 
By far the most effective additive for controlling detonation is tetra­ethyl lead. Unlike the fuel used in cars, lead is still added, albeit in much reduced quantities, to aviation gasoline. The most common fuel used for piston engine aircraft is 100 LL (lower lead). 100 LL is dyed blue and has replaced the 100 fuel which is coloured green. Both 100 and 100 LL have the same resistance to detonation despite the lower lead content of the latter. Some older piston engines were designed to run originally on 80/87. This fuel is dyed red. 

Other Factors Influencing Detonation 
Although fuels are selected for their resistance to detonation they can still detonate! Anything which raises the temperature or pressure of the mixture will increase the likelihood of detonation. Carburettor heat at high power settings, overheated cylinders, and high power settings at low RPM all increase the risk of detonation. 
Not surprisingly, engines which use high compression ratios or which are supercharged require a fuel with very good anti-knock qualities. 
If fuel ofthe specified octane rating or grade isn't available, you may operate the aircraft temporarily using a fuel with a higher rating but never use one with a lower rating/grade. 
Piston Engine Fuel 
The Combustion Process and Mixture Ratios 
The ratio of air to fuel which ensures complete combustion is about 15:1 by mass. This ratio is sometimes referred to as the "chemically correct mixture", "ideal ratio" or "stoichiometric mixture". Stoichiometric comes from the Greek words for "element" and "measure", so in this case it refers to the chemical elements in the fuel/air mixture. 
When a chemically correct mixture is ignited, all the hydrogen and carbon in the fuel combine with all the oxygen in the air for complete combustion. The products of stoichiometric combustion are carbon dioxide and water vapour, coupled with an increase in the temperature of the inert nitrogen gas. 
The chemically correct mixture cannot be used for normal operations because the high combustion temperature would incur the risk of detonation. 
With the mixture set about 10% richer, the excess fuel absorbs some ofthe latent heat and cools the charge below the detonation value. Rich mixtures also burn quickly. Both factors help to reduce the risk of detonation. 
In practice not all cylinders receive exactly the same mixture so to err on the safe side a 15% rich mixture is used at normal cruising power. Typically, mixture strengths vary from 8:1 (rich) to 20:1 (lean). 
ft+ifff·io 
Chemical correct
Rich Lean / weak
mixture ratio
8:1 20:1
15:1 

Fuel 


Piston Engine Fuel 
The Combustion Process and Mixture Ratios continued 
At high power settings (high combustion pressure and temperature) the risk of detonation increases. When high power is required the mixture is further enriched to about 20% rich to obtain the necessary cooling. 
At take-off the mixture may be as much as 30% rich. Apart from its cooling function, this excess fuel has no other use. It isn't fully burned and is discharged in the exhaust as a combination of fuel vapour and carbon monoxide. Very rich mixture causes black smoke in the exhaust. It can form carbon deposits in the cylinder and lead to fouling of the plugs. 
Ironically, a weaker mixture will also result in cooler burning, not only because less fuel is being burned per power stroke but also because the rate of burning slows down. 
With extremely weak mixtures the mixture may still be burning as the inlet valve opens. This can lead to "popping back" in the inlet manifold. 
ft+Milo 

A weak mixture will produce cooler burning gas but, paradoxically, it will result in higher engine temperatures. This is because the slower burn gives more time for heat to be transferred to the body of the engine. So a lean mixture will result in an increased CHT but a reduced exhaust gas temperature. 
The slower burn resulting from a weak mixture results in reduced power but has the advantage of reducing fuel consumption. A 20% lean mixture is enough to achieve the best specific fuel consumption. 
Finally, at very low idling RPM the momentum of the exhaust gas is much reduced and consequently not all of it is scavenged from the cylinder. The remainder dilutes the incoming fresh mixture and effectively over-weakens it. Consequently the mixture must be enriched as idle RPM is approached. 
Prolonged ground running at idle with a rich mixture can cause spark plug fouling. To prevent this, the engine should be run at about 1000-1200 RPM. 
Piston Engine Fuel 
Practical Use of Mixture 
If your aeroplane is fitted with a carburettor (discussed in the following chapter) you can manually change the mixture to meet the requirements for various stages of flight. In the exam you could be asked about mixture settings particularly with reference to the graphs shown over the next two pages. Notice that one graph the x axis goes from a rich to weak mixture and the other weak to rich. Take care! 
In truth the graphs are not quite the same, the one with the single line is a more theoretical curve with fixed rpm and manifold pressure and the one with multiple curves is a more practical graph. So the numbers are in approximately comparable locations. 
Let's start with positions 1 and 2, in the practical graph where rpm and manifold pressure change, there is very little between the achievable power of positions 1 and 2. The slightly richer position 1 is preferred for take-off, probably to ensure freedom from detonation. Position 2 gives slightly more power at the expense of increased temperature and risk of detonation. Note that position 2 has a significantly lower specific fuel consumption so position 2 might be used when you needed to high-speed cruise. Some books refer to positions 1 & 2 as max power rich and max power lean respectively. 
ft.Hf·llo 
Effect of mixture ratio (massflow air / massflow fuel) on power at a given RPM and manifold pressure 
2 

Mixture ratio
10 12 14 16 

You might imagine you would use this for best economy as it is at the theoretical chemically correct ratio. In practice, it doesn't achieve perfect combustion. In addition, this is where the temperatures are at their highest -not good for engine fatigue! So, we need to find somewhere cooler than position 4. 
Piston Engine Fuel 
ft.f:ii/lo 
Practical Use of Mixture continued 
The multiple curve graph clearly shows that point 5 gives the best economy -look at the specific fuel consumption. However, there are two risks associated with this position, first the burning is so slow that it can ignite the incoming gases resulting in backfiring which causes a loss of power and damage. Second, if you fail to enrich the mixture prior to advancing the power very bad detonation occurs, causing loss of power and damage. Position 5 is known as 'best economy lean side of top'. This is because the method of setting this mixture is to find the peak EGT (top) and then lean off further to reduce the temperature by a set value. 
Point 3. Refer to the specific fuel consumption curve, notice there is very little difference between positions 5 and 3 but position 3 is free from the worst excesses of position 5. So, position 3 is the preferred economy setting. It is known as 'best economy rich side of top' because you find it by leaning to achieve peak EGT (top) and then enrich the mixture reducing the temperature by a specified value. 
BEST MAX ECONOMY POWER RANGE RANGE V ....... € I I ~ ~~~~L?B,. ·""""~GI Cylt.t:S:::: :'4s ~f"'lff4D'I I ~ERCI NT ,PO~ ER I '2 1l.......-; )rl 4 'I' 5 I r:.,' ~t~ ~ ~ v' ..... ~  ~­~liff?~ ,••IP~~-.., :.ir. ~ ~,:­---­--­~ ~~v ,e,,~~1/3/~,~ V  

4-----Lean Mixture Rich 
Piston Engine Fuel 
Volatility, Viscosity & Vapour Locking 
When referring to fuel, volatility is a measure of how readily it will change from liquid to vapour, in other words, how easily it will vaporise. Oddly, this is a bad thing and a good thing: we don't want fuel to vaporise in the tanks or delivery pipelines but we do need it to vaporise readily so that it will burn. 
Of the two fuels we use in aviation, gasoline and kerosene, gasoline is the most volatile and particularly prone to vaporising in pipelines if they become either hot or evacuated. The vapour forms a bubble which sits at the highest point in the pipe, and can cause serious blockage to fuel flow. This is known as a vapour lock. To prevent such a hazardous situation submersible fuel pumps are mounted in the fuel tank to ensure the fuel is always delivered under positive pressure. This strategy is employed in both gasoline and kerosene fuel systems. 
Gravity feeding in the climb is a problem in some jet aircraft. The reducing atmospheric pressure with altitude causes the fuel to vaporise which is sometimes given the term 'foaming'. The result is that the engine(s) could be starved of fuel. In this situation the pilots will need to determine the 'gravity feed ceiling' which, could be as low as FL 150. If using JET B which vaporises more readily than JetA1 then the ceiling may be even lower. In one of the Airbus aircraft the 'gravity feed ceiling' is FL 100 when using JET 
ft+Milo 

To prevent vapour locking, which can lead to fuel starvation, a common type of limitation imposed by the Minimum Equipment List (MEL) in large transport aeroplanes for complete boost pump failure is: 
• 
Minimum fuel temperature limitation 

• 
Maximum operating altitude limitation 


• Extra reserve fuel has to be carried 
• No fuel may be carried in the affected fuel tank 
Piston Engine Fuel 
vaporise. Oddly, this is a bad thing and a good thing: we don't want fuel to vaporise in the tanks or delivery pipelines but we do need it to vaporise readily so that it will burn. 
Of the two fuels we use in aviation, gasoline and kerosene, gasoline is the most volatile and particularly prone to vaporising in pipelines if they become either hot or evacuated. The vapour forms a bubble which sits at the highest point in the pipe, and can cause serious blockage to fuel flow. This is known as a vapour lock. To prevent such a hazardous situation submersible fuel pumps are mounted in the fuel tank to ensure the fuel is always delivered under positive pressure. This strategy is employed in both gasoline and kerosene fuel systems. 
Gravity feeding in the climb is a problem in some jet aircraft. The reducing atmospheric pressure with altitude causes the fuel to vaporise which is sometimes given the term 'foaming'. The result is that the engine(s) could be starved of fuel. In this situation the pilots will need to determine the 'gravity feed ceiling' which, could be as low as FL 150. If using JET B which vaporises more readily than JetA1 then the ceiling may be even lower. In one of the Airbus aircraft the 'gravity feed ceiling' is FL 100 when using JET B. 
There may also be a rate of climb limit to reduce the rate of pressure change. Of course reduced flight levels will seriously impair flight range meaning a diversion is likely. 
ft+Milo 

To prevent vapour locking, which can lead to fuel starvation, a common type of limitation imposed by the Minimum Equipment List (MEL) in large transport aeroplanes for complete boost pump failure is: 
• 
Minimum fuel temperature limitation 

• 
Maximum operating altitude limitation 


• Extra reserve fuel has to be carried • No fuel may be carried in the affected fuel tank 
Piston Engine Fuel 
Volatility, Viscosity & Vapour Locking continued 
Viscosity is a measure on internal resistance within a fluid its value represents resistance to flow. An old way of measuring viscosity was to place the liquid in a cup known as the Ford cup (as shown opposite). The cup has a hole in the bottom for the fluid to flow out. Once the cup was filled, scientists timed how long it took for the cup to empty. The longer it took, the higher the viscosity. This simple method failed to take account of many variables such as temperature and pressure, so nowadays more sophisticated techniques used. 
Fuel needs to be easily pumped so must be of a low viscosity. While gasoline presents problems with vaporisation, jeUdiesel fuel (kerosene) has problems with viscosity, particularly at low temperatures when the fuel steadily reverts to a wax rendering it unpumpable. In high-flying long-range jets fuel temperature is monitored and methods of heating are required. 



Lesson 32 
Carburettors 

AGK 32 
Carburettors 
ft.IF·H o 
Engine Fuel Pump 
Fuel is delivered from the tanks to the engine by an engine driven 
pump, often backed up by an electrically driven pump for redundancy. The engine driven pumps may be of the spur gear type, as we already met in the chapter on hydraulics, or they may be of the vane type. 

Carburettors 
ft.ifid o 
Engine Fuel Pump continued 
The vane type pump works by rotating a vane within a housing of variable volume. By reducing the volume available the pressure of the fuel is increased. To achieve this the vanes are designed to slide across each other around the point of rotation. You can see in the illustration that Chamber B, currently on the supply side, is considerably larger than Chamber D on the pressure port. There is an animation of a vane type pump in the on line course that shows this very well. 



Carburettors 
ft+itido 
Engine Fuel Supply 
The amount of air delivered to the engine is controlled by the 
Throttle
throttle. But, before it can be used for combustion it must have 
valve 
exactly the correct amount of fuel added to it. Furthermore, the 
I 
Metered fuel 
fuel must be well atomised to maximise combustion efficiency. 
delivered with air 

These are the functions of the carburettor or, on more modern Air inlet
designs, the fuel injection system. 
Both systems infer the amount of air entering the engine induction 
system and add sufficient fuel to maintain the correct mixture ratio. 
Air inlet 
fuel jet 

Carburettors 
The Basic Float Carburettor 
Throttle butterfly Utube principle 

Principle of Operation maintained Vent to atmosphere
l l
by float 
Filtered fuel is pumped into a chamber in the carburettor. The level of fuel in the chamber is regulated by a float which uses a needle valve to shut off the fuel supply when the fuel reaches the correct level. 
A piped outlet from the fuel chamber forms a U-tube which exits in the carburettor's "throat" or "choke". When the engine is stopped the fuel levels in the chamber and the U-tube are the same because both are exposed to atmospheric air at the same pressure. 
When the engine is running air is drawn in through the inlet and 

accelerates as it passes through the throat. Because of the Fuel delivered under pressure from aircraft fuel tanks
venturi effect the pressure in the throat drops. As a result fuel is drawn up the U-tube and into the air flowing through the throat. 
The nozzle is designed so that the fuel is finely atomised as it mixes with the air. A calibrated restrictor known as the "jet" regulates the amount of fuel flowing up the U-tube. 
Carburettors 
ft.ifid o 
Principle of Operation continued 
Throttle butterfly 
As engine RPM increases, the speed of the air flowing through the throat increases causing a further drop in pressure. This causes more fuel to be drawn through the nozzle. In this way the mixture of fuel and air is naturally regulated at all power settings. 
Some points about this basic principle of operation need further emphasis: 
¦ 
The throttle butterfly valve controls the amount of air passing through the throat. If the valve is opened, the flow of mixture to the cylinders will increase and the engine will accelerate. 

¦ 
When the fuel level drops in the float chamber the float will also drop. This opens the fuel inlet needle valve and allows more fuel to flow into the chamber. 

¦ 
The fuel is pumped under pressure to the carburettor to 



prevent it vaporising in the supply line, causing vapour lock. The carburettor's basic principle of operation is relatively straightforward but, as we shall see in the following sections, this isn't quite the whole story. 
Carburettors 

n +e+•o 
Additional Fuel Metering Requirements 
The simple system we have so far described takes no account of air density and ignores the fact that the fuel flow from the nozzle doesn't vary linearly with the amount of air flowing through the throat. 
In practice this simple system would result in a progressively richer mixture as engine speed and/or altitude increases. Furthermore, because of the ram air effect in the inlet, the mixture would become progressively weaker with increased airspeed. 
The system also fails to provide the special mixture settings required at very low and very high power settings. So a practical carburettor must have a number of additional refinements. 
Throttle butterfly 
l 
Carburettors 
ft+HUo 
The Pressure Balance 
At high airspeeds the intake pressure will rise because of the ram effect of the air entering it. This increases the pressure in the throat which causes a drop in the fuel flow from the U-tube resulting in a weaker mixture. To avoid this problem a pressure balance duct connects the intake and the float chamber. 
The duct ensures that the pressure in the intake and float chamber remain the same. 
.., The purpose of the pressure balance duct is to ensure that the correct mixture ratio is maintained across a range of airspeeds and flight conditions. 
high forward speed 

Carburettors 


The Diffuser 
Airflow to diffuser
The fuel flow from the nozzle will increase with increased airflow through the throat but the relationship isn't linear. In fact, doubling the mass flow through the throat would cause a fourfold drop in pressure and a correspondingly large addition offuel, resulting in an excessively rich mixture. The solution to the problem is to fit a diffuser immediately after the main jet. 
Air from the pressure balance duct is fed though a perforated tube called the diffuser. Fuel enters the diffuser from the main jet. At idle RPM the levels in the diffuser and float chamber are almost equal. 
When the engine is running, the fuel level in the diffuser falls because of the slight restriction caused by the jet. This uncovers some ofthe perforations in the diffuser allowing air from the pressure balance duct to flow in. This reduces the pressure at the nozzle, so reducing the rate of fuel flow. 
r 
The purpose of the diffuser is to maintain the correct mixture The perforations in the diffuser are very precisely sized to ensure ratio across a wide range of engine speeds. 
that the correct mixture ratio is maintained across the whole speed range of the engine. 
The diffuser has an added advantage. The increased mixing of air and fuel aids atomisation, helping to produce a good emulsion of air and fuel. 
Carburettors 

n +e+•o 
Mixture Control 
Air density decreases with altitude. So the mass of air passing through the throat will reduce with altitude. This results in a progressively richer mixture as the aircraft climbs. 
To compensate for the barometric effect of changing air density a mixture control valve is fitted. The valve is either manually controlled or operated automatically by an aneroid capsule. 
There are many designs for mixture control. The example shown here regulates the flow of air from the pressure balance duct to the diffuser thus varying its effectiveness. 
Alternative methods include connecting the float chamber to the venturi to lower the float chamber pressure, or using a needle to vary the size of the jet. In all variants the systems adjust the fuel flow -not the air flow. 
Automatic systems invariably have a manual override. Manual 

mixture control levers are coloured red. 
The mixture control is not just used to compensate for reduced air density. It is also used to set a leaner mixture, for example during an economy cruise. This can produce a significant reduction in fuel consumption. 
r 
The purpose of the mixture control is to adjust the mixture to take account of changes in air density and to reduce fuel consumption. 

Carburettors 
Slow Running Jet 
Idle fuel flow 
At very small throttle openings the pressure drop in the venturi is negligible, resulting in an insufficient flow offuel from the main jet. 
-r~ 
The solution is to insert an additional jet specially designed to cater for low power conditions. 
The slow running jet is placed just at the edge of the almost closed butterfly to take advantage of the strong pressure drop in the constriction caused by the valve. This jet is designed to provide a rich mixture at idle. 
As the butterfly opens the constriction disappears. With no venturi effect the fuel ceases to flow from the slow running jet. 


The system usually includes a cut off valve linked to the mixture control lever. The cut off valve ensures that all fuel flow to the engine ceases when the pilot shuts down the engine. The shut off valve is operated by moving the mixture control lever rearwards to the "Idle Cut Off' (ICO) position. 
The purpose of the slow running jet is to ensure a sufficiently rich mixture at low RPM. The purpose of the cut off valve is to assist engine shut-down. 

Carburettors 
Power Enrichment 
At high power settings a power enrichment system is required to provide the rich mixture needed to cool the cylinders. 
There are two ways this can be achieved. A variable size main jet can be used or, more commonly, a second jet is brought into play by a cam linked to the throttle. 
At high throttle settings the cam forces down a piston which allows fuel to flow to the power jet. The power jet shuts off during all but high power settings and for this reason it is sometimes confusingly referred to as an economiser system. 
The purpose of the power jet or "economiser" is to provide a rich mixture at high power settings to assist cylinder cooling. 
lo... 
ft.iiiiWo 
Power jet cam operated by pilots throttle 
Carburettors 
The Accelerator Pump 
When the throttle is opened rapidly the air flow to the engine increases almost instantaneously. But there is a slight delay before reduced pressure in the throat causes more fuel to be added to the mixture. This can cause the engine to hesitate or even stop -a phenomenon known as "weak " or "lean" cut. The solution is an accelerator pump. 
The throttle lever is connected by a suitable system of links to a small piston type pump in the carburettor. When the throttle lever is moved rapidly forward the accelerator pump injects a quantity of fuel directly into the venturi. 
Accelerator pump jet cam operated by pilots throttle 
Power jet cam 
Carburettors 

Induction and Carburettor Icing 
Causes 
The carburettor throat has one potentially disastrous flaw. As well as inducing a drop in pressure it also produces a drop in temperature. A further temperature reduction is caused by fuel evaporating as it emerges from the nozzle. At low power settings, with the throttle butterfly forming a tight constriction, the drop in pressure and temperature is more pronounced. In the worst case the temperature in the throat can drop by as much as 25°C. 
It is a common mistake to assume that carburettor icing only occurs at low ambient temperatures. A much more relevant factor is the amount of moisture in the air. 
At moderate or high levels of humidity ice will form in the intake duct or throat whenever the temperature drop is sufficient to reduce the intake temperature below zero. 
Ice formation in the intake and throat restricts the amount of air that can enter the engine, causing a marked reduction in engine power. Ice may sometimes form around the throttle butterfly, causing it to stick. If this happens when the butterfly is closed, for example during a prolonged descent, the result could be rather embarrassing. 


Carburettors 
Causes 
The risk of carburettor icing varies principally with humidity, ambient temperature and throttle position, as shown in this illustration. 
With a Relative Humidity (RH) in excess of 60% carburettor icing may be expected in virtually all flight conditions at ordinary ambient temperatures. So, when flying in fog or cloud, i.e. in saturated air, intake heating must be used. Mist (visible moisture in the atmosphere) generally implies a relative humidity of 95% so again, intake heating is prudent. 
With an ambient temperature of 18°-25°C and a relative humidity of only 30%, serious carburettor icing is likely if the throttle is closed for prolonged periods for example, during a prolonged descent or whilst taxying. Carburettor icing is not confined to cold conditions. In fact, the most dangerous conditions occur when cruise or descent power is set on relatively warm days with moderate or high humidity. 

Risk of carburettor icing in air free of cloud fog or precipitation Risk is maximum in cloud fog or precipitation. 
The temperature range can be taken from the 100% humidity line. -Serious -any power Moderate -cruise power Serious -descent power -Serious -descent power Light 
Dew point
(OC) 
fr-c-,,C.....-,,c-; 30° 
20° 
Carburettors 

Symptoms 
The symptoms of induction or carburettor icing may include some or all ofthe following: 
• 
Loss of RPM . 

• 
Reduced performance . 

• 
Reduced inlet manifold pressure . 

• 
Decreased Exhaust Gas Temperature (EGT) . 

• 
Rough running . 

• 
Jammed throttle . 


In extreme cases ice accretion can cause the engine to stop altogether. On a fixed pitch propeller engine the first sign of carburettor icing is likely to be an unexplained drop in RPM. On variable pitch installations the RPM will initially remain constant but the MAP will reduce. 

Carburettors 
--------------------------------~ 
Carburettor heating systems offer reasonably good protection against icing. Whenever carburettor icing is likely the pilot manually selects an alternative air source which uses hot air drawn from a heat exchanger wrapped around the exhaust system. The alternate air source is usually unfiltered so care must be taken when using it on the ground -especially on dusty or grassy surfaces. 
Using heated air has five potential disadvantages: 
• 
It reduces engine power . 

• 
In cold ambient conditions the hot air may raise the temperature of air in the venturi from a point well below that likely to induce icing, to the optimum temperature for icing to occur! 


¦ 
Using carburettor heating to clear ice which is already well established may cause further problems as the ice breaks off and is ingested by the engine. 

¦ 
The use of heated air at high power settings can cause detonation. 

¦ 
Because hot air is less dense it will enrich the mixture. 


The carburettor heat system must be checked before flight. This is done by checking for a temporary drop in RPM (usually around 100-200 RPM) whilst carburettor heat is selected on, with the engine running at about 75% of max RPM. 


Carburettor heat on Carburettor Carburettor 'unfiltered air' air box heat valve 

If carburettor heat is selected with ice present, then the engine will continue to run rough for a brief period, and then smooth out. If no ice is present then you can expect a drop in power as you are unnecessarily using warm, so less dense, air. 


Lesson 33 
Fuel Injection Systems 

AGK 33 

Fuel Injection Systems 
Fuel Injection 

Fuel injection systems are replacing the traditional carburettor on 
Throttle
modern piston engines. Injection systems provide even and 
valve 
reliable fuel delivery, better icing protection and quicker throttle 
I 
Metered fuel 
response. 
delivered with air 
Air 

Because injection systems deliver fuel under pressure to the inlet engine they don't need to use a venturi in the air intake. This makes them much less susceptible to air intake icing. 
There are two types of fuel injection system direct and indirect. Both deliver a carefully measured amount of fuel under pressure to the engine. Indirect injection systems deliver fuel to the inlets, usually just before the inlet valve. Direct injection systems inject Air 
inlet 
precisely measured quantities of fuel directly into the cylinders. Amongst other things this requires an extremely accurate timing mechanism to ensure that the fuel is delivered at precisely the right moment in the firing cycle. 
Most aircraft engines use the low pressure continuous flow indirect system because this eliminates the need for complex injection timing devices. The downside is reduced fuel efficiency. 
fuel jet 

Fuel Injection Systems 
Indirect Fuel Injection 
Continuous-flow injection systems deliver fuel continuously to the inlet ports. They pay no attention to intake-valve opening or crankshaft position. The system has five basic components: 
¦ 
An engine driven pump (EDP) which supplies fuel at pressure to the fuel air control unit. 

¦ 
An electrically driven pump which also supplies fuel to the fuel air control unit. 

¦ 
An injector assembly which adjusts the fuel flow according to throttle position and mixture setting. 

¦ 
A manifold valve which distributes fuel from the injector to the fuel nozzles. 

¦ 
Fuel nozzles which spray finely atomized fuel into the inlets of each cylinder. 


Fuel is delivered under pressure to the injector unit. The output pressure of the engine driven pump is determined by engine speed. Normally its output considerably exceeds the pressure required by the injector assembly so the excess pressure is dumped by a relief-valve. This arrangement ensures that the injector assembly is always supplied with sufficient fuel pressure throughout most ofthe engine's operating range. 

The electric pump also provides fuel under pressure to the injector assembly. It has two functions. Firstly it provides pressure in the event that the engine driven pump fails. Secondly, it is used to prime the engine prior to start. 
The injector assembly or "fuel air control unit" controls the amount of fuel directed to the manifold valve. It comprises a mixture control valve and a metering valve. 
Pressurized fuel enters the assembly where it first encounters the mixture control valve. This valve is directly controlled by the mixture control lever and determines how much fuel is delivered to the metering valve. 
The metering valve is connected to, and controlled by, the throttle assembly which is also directly connected to the throttle butterfly valve. When the throttle lever is moved towards full power the throttle butterfly opens and so also does the metering valve to allow more fuel to flow. The ratio of movement ofthe metering valve to the movement of the throttle butterfly valve is precisely determined by the mechanical relationship of the operating gear. 
Fuel Injection Systems 
Indirect Fuel Injection (continued) 
It is important to appreciate that the mixture control valve is the only means of adjusting the otherwise pre-set ratio of fuel to air. 
Metered fuel from the injector is then fed to the manifold valve. The manifold valve has two functions. Its primary purpose is to divide the metered fuel between all the cylinders. Its secondary function is to provide a positive means of stopping all fuel flow when the mixture control is set to idle cut off. 
Fuel from the manifold valve is fed to each of the fuel nozzles through stainless-steel injector lines. The injector nozzle has a calibrated orifice in its upper chamber, controlling the amount of fuel injected. The lower portion of the nozzle is used as a mixing chamber. Here the metered fuel is combined with air to help to ensure that it is completely atomised before it enters the cylinder. Normally aspirated engines use ambient air. Turbocharged engines use boost pressure. 
Fuel injection systems are usually monitored by measuring fuel pressure at the outlet of the fuel manifold. Since there is a direct relationship between pressure and flow this sensor also serves to provide information on fuel flow. 
ft.ih=d o 
From fuel tank 

Fuel Injection Systems 
Direct Injection 
Larger more powerful engines, and diesel engines use direct fuel injection systems. In this system the fuel is delivered directly into the cylinder. Direct fuel injection produces better fuel efficiency. The subject is covered in detail in the section on diesel engines. 
Fuel Injection Systems 
Engine Priming Systems 
To help engine starting, particularly from cold, a very rich mixture is needed to ensure that sufficient fuel is vaporized On a carburetted engine neat fuel is usually injected into the inlet manifold. This is achieved in one of three ways:A manually operated plunger forces down the float in the carburettor float chamber flooding the carburettor.The throttle is exercised to activate the accelerator pump.A manually or electrically operated priming pump is used.Manual priming pumps are usually operated by a plunger type priming control. After use, the primer control must be locked off to prevent over fuelling. Injector systems automatically supply fuel as soon as the booster pump is switched on and consequently need no additional priming system. 
Care must be taken not to over prime and flood the engine. Excess fuel can cause a fire in the engine intake or carburettor, foul the spark plugs, or may wash the lubricating oil off the cylinder walls. Some checklists recommend continuing to crank the engine with a carburettor fire, to draw the flames in to the engine where they can do less damage. Once the fire is extinguished the aircraft must then be fully checked for fire damage, of course. 


The Engine Air Induction System 
Air is drawn into the carburettor or injector through an intake air filter. The filter removes potentially damaging dirt particles. 
Air intakes are susceptible to impact icing caused by droplets of super-cooled water freezing as they impact the intake. The symptoms of intake icing are the same as for carburettor icing and can occur on both carburetted and fuel injected engines. Carburettor heat may not be able to clear intake icing. 
Fuel injected engines have an alternate air source which also bypasses the intake air filter. On both types care should be taken when using the unfiltered air source. 
Both carburetted and injected engines should be checked before flight for satisfactory operation using alternate air. However, unlike the carburetted engine, fuel injection systems will not show a drop in RPM when alternate air is selected. 
Fuel Injection Systems 
ft+M=b!o 
EGT Gauges 
Some engine installations also measure the temperature of the exhaust gases. Like CHT devices, Exhaust Gas Temperature (EGT) measuring systems use thermocouples. 
The temperature of combustion, and hence the temperature of the exhaust gases, is affected by the ratio offuel to air in the mixture. Consequently, EGT is often used as a method for accurately adjusting the mixture ratio in cruise flight. 
The highest combustion temperature occurs at an air/fuel ratio of 
15:1. Combustion is cooler at richer mixtures because of the cooling effect of the excess fuel. It is also cooler when the mixture is very lean, this time because of the excess air in the mixture. So, in theory at least, peak EGT coincides with the ideal air/fuel ratio of 15:1. 

Two cruise power settings can be set with the help of EGT. 
Fuel Injection Systems 

Setting Power Cruise Power cruise is set by leaning the mixture to achieve peak EGT  Power cruise (12:1)  Peak EGT (15:1)  
and then slowly enriching it until the EGT drops slightly. This give  
the ideal power cruise ratio of 12:1.  Charge temperature reduced by excess fuel rich mixture  

Fuel Injection Systems 
ft.l=h=h! o 
Setting Economy Cruise 

Economy cruise (17:1) 1 Peak EGT (15:1) 
Economy cruise is set by leaning the mixture until peak EGT is achieved and then leaning it slightly more until the EGT is seen to 
Charge temperature
drop slightly. This will give the ideal economy cruise mixture ratio 
reduced by excess 
of 17:1. 
air weak/lean mixture 
Aircraft performance manuals will specify the actual temperature drop from peak EGT required for each cruise settings. 
Its very important to understand that both these techniques apply only to mixture settings at cruise power levels. Excessive leaning at higher power setting will lead to detonation. 




Lesson 34 
Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
AGK 34 

Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
ft+i&Ho 
Piston Engine Power and Performance 
There are three operational descriptions of power output: 
Take-Off Power. Take-off power is the maximum power the engine can produce. It cannot be used continuously and is normally limited by time or altitude. 
Maximum Continuous Power can be used continuously without any time limit. This power setting reduces physical stress and excessive temperatures, extending the fatigue life of the engine. 
Cruise Power. Cruise power is normally expressed as a percentage of maximum power. 
Most piston engine aircraft have a variety of cruise power settings, 
e.g. 60%, 65%, 70% or 75%. Maximum cruise power will be the same as Maximum continuous power. Your choice will depend on factors such as economy, range, speed, engine life or simply company policy etc. 
The power developed by a piston engine depends on the mass of mixture drawn into the cylinder "the charge". The charge mass depends on the density of the air and the pressure in the inlet manifold. At full throttle on a normally aspirated engine the pressure in the manifold will be just less than atmospheric pressure. 

Density varies with temperature, altitude and humidity, so the relationship between pressure and density is not constant. The most direct determinant of engine power is the density altitude. 
Density altitude is the altitude in the International Standard Atmosphere at which the air density would be equal to the actual air density at the place of observation. In other words it is the pressure altitude adjusted for any temperature deviation from ISA. 
Pressure altitude is the altitude displayed with 1013 hPa set on the altimeter. 
In ISA conditions sea level temperature is 15°C decreasing by 2°C per 1000 ft. 
The density altitude can be calculated approximately using the following formula: 
Density altitude= Pressure altitude +/-(the difference in ISA 
temperature x 120) 

Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
ft+iiflo 
Density Altitude continued 
Consider an airfield at an altitude 4000 ft. The OAT is observed to be 21 °c. The ISA temperature for this height should be 15°C ­8°C (2-0c per 1000 ft) i.e. 7°C. So the difference between actual and ISA temperature is 14°C. 
The density altitude is 4000 + (14 x 120) = 5680 ft. 
In other words, the maximum power produced by the engine at this airfield on this day will be equivalent to an engine operating at almost 5700 ft. 
Engines produce the most power when the air is cold, dry and dense i.e. in winter high pressure conditions at sea level. 
Piston engine power is translated into usable thrust by a propeller. So, when considering power output we must also take into account the efficiency ofthe propeller. 
At high atmospheric densities the engine produces more power, but it will also use more power to turn the propeller in the relatively dense air. The reverse is true at low atmospheric densities. Furthermore, for aerodynamic reasons, propeller efficiency varies significantly with airspeed. 


Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
ft+ifflo 
Superchargers 
On a normally aspirated engine the mass of charge entering the cylinder decreases with increasing density altitude. To maintain maximum continuous power as the aircraft climbs the pilot must progressively open the throttle. Eventually the point will be reached where the throttle can be opened no further. From this point on, power output will inevitably and steadily reduce. 
In fact, by 20 000 ft a normally aspirated engine will have lost 50% of its maximum available power. 
We can delay the point at which this drop in power begins by using an air compressor to artificially maintain the mass of charge air entering the cylinders. Or, to phrase it more accurately, we can increase the volumetric efficiency of the engine. 
The concept of compressing the inlet air is known as supercharging and the compressor is known as the supercharger. 
Superchargers are used in one of two ways. The most most common way is to boost the maximum power of the engine at sea level e.g. make a 1 00hp engine produce 11 0hp. These are know as 'ground boosted' superchargers and usually require the engine to be strengthened to withstand the greater combustion pressures. 

The other, less common, way is to maintain sea level power during the climb. These are known as 'altitude boosted' superchargers. 
While most of the syllabus refers to turbochargers, you are required to know the differences between superchargers and turbochargers, so let's take a brief look at superchargers. 
Early superchargers were driven by a geared drive from the engine, therefore they were said to be 'internally driven'. In the large radial engines of the 1940s superchargers could absorb as much as 70 hp which was a significant loss of energy. 
Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 

Superchargers continued 
In this basic, single-stage, supercharger the fuel/air mixture is ducted to a radial/centrifugal compressor, also often referred to as a "blower impeller". This accelerates the mixture outwards via the divergent vanes. Once accelerated, the mixture then passes through a pair of diffusers where the air velocity is traded for pressure energy. This high-pressure fuel/air mixture is now directed to the cylinders. Such superchargers could be single speed, two speed or even variable speed. The various parts are labelled opposite and there is a 3D model on the next page for you to explore. 

Engine 
driven 
shaft 

Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
ft.Hflo 
Superchargers continued 
This diagram shows the supercharger positioned between the carburettor and the manifold, with representative pressures in the Intake, Inlet and Induction Manifold. 
Carburettor air intake 
14.7 psi 
Induction manifold 19 psi 
Carburettor 
Throttle valve partly closed 
Inlet 
9.5 psi 
Impeller 

Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
ft.Hflo 

Ground boosted superchargers  
The image opposite shows how an engine able to produce 700 hp when normally aspirated but when boosted can achieve 1000 HP at sea level. With this type of supercharger power decays as the aircraft climbs, and at 10 000 ft the power has reduced to ground level power of 700 HP.  1000 HP 700 HP  
Power (HP)  
------Aspirated Engine  
10K  20K Altitude  30K  



Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
ft+++flo 
Altitude boosted superchargers 
The image opposite contains several interesting points. First, although it is an altitude boosted supercharger it can be used as a ground boosted system for short periods e.g. take-off. Second, you will notice that the power increases slightly until the rated altitude. During this phase the boost pressure is constant so the charge of air entering the cylinder remains constant, so why does power increase? Simply put, exhaust back pressure decreases with altitude providing improved scavenging during the exhaust stroke. 
The Rated Altitude is defined as the maximum altitude at which full rated manifold pressure can be maintained by the supercharger. This is also the altitude at which full rated power can be maintained. Beyond the rated altitude the power decays much as it does for a normally aspirated engine. 
On the graph opposite, note the difference of power between normal aspiration and supercharging at ground level. The difference indicates the power lost to drive the supercharger. 
T/O Power at higher RPM Max 5 mins ; _~----}Power for 
_; -; • : -' --Supercharger 
Power (HP) Normal 
Engine
--t-------;------....--------T""" 

10K 20K 30K Altitude 

Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
ft.Wflo 
Altitude boosted superchargers continued 
The image opposite shows various power curves for different boost and rpm settings. The purpose of this graph is to show the difference between Rated Altitude and Full Throttle Height. We have already said that Rated altitude is associated with rated power, but we may use lower settings to reduce stress on the engine to increase its life. Full Throttle Height is defined as the altitude at which a given Manifold Absolute Pressure (MAP) set can be maintained at a given rpm. The lower the MAP selected, the greater the altitude to which it can be maintained. Note also the odd mix of height and altitude in the definitions. 
Both Rated Altitude and Full Throttle Height are terms associated with engine driven superchargers. 
As soon as metallurgy found ways to deal with much higher temperatures engine driven superchargers became redundant, being replaced by turbo-superchargers, normally called turbochargers. Turbochargers are powered by exhaust gases. In other words, turbochargers recover energy from hot exhaust gases that would normally be lost. 
HP 
1200 Take off power Full throttle heights 
\ .4~ Rated altitude for given boost ~ rpm Boost pressure (bar) pressures and RPM.
1100 0 
1.lbal:--:::::::: _____\ _ ~ 1000 1400 ,pm / \ , .23 'oat 
900 2300 rplTI 
,.,sbat 
800 2200 rpm 

700  
600  
500  
400  
300 Altitude  10K 20 K 30 K Altitude boosted engine power curves at various boost and RPM settings  


Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
Centrifugal Impellers / Compressors 
Centrifugal compressors consist ofthree main components 

¦ 
an impeller Casing 

¦ 
a diffuser 

¦ 
a casing which houses both the impeller and diffuser. 



Impeller 
Diffuser 

Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
Centrifugal Impellers / Compressors continued 
The impeller rotates at very high speed (as much as 40 000 RPM). Air enters the "eye" of the impeller where it is picked up by the rotating vanes and propelled rapidly outwards from the centre by 
Diffuser Vanes
centrifugal force. As it moves from the eye to the circumference of the impeller the air increases in velocity, pressure and temperature. 
The air leaves the impeller tangentially and enters the diffuser vanes. These form a series of divergent ducts which trade some ofthe air's kinetic energy for pressure energy. 
The impeller and diffuser each account for about half the overall rise in pressure. The pressurised air is then ducted either directly to the inlet manifold or to the eye of a second impeller to generate a further rise in pressure. 

Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 

Turbochargers 
The most common method of boosting manifold pressure is to use an externally driven supercharger, better known as a turbocharger. 
The principal advantage of a turbocharger is that it uses energy that would otherwise have been lost to drive its impeller. The energy in question is contained in the exhaust gases. 
A turbocharger unit comprises a turbine linked to an impeller by a short shaft. The turbocharger's bearings are lubricated by engine oil. 
Exhaust gas exiting the engine drives the turbine which in turn drives the impeller. 
The system uses exhaust gas, so it quickly becomes very hot. This means that it cannot be used to compress the mixture. So, unlike the supercharger, the turbocharger compresses inlet air only. Fuel is then added to the compressed air to create the mixture. 


Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
Advantages and Disadvantages of Turbochargers Throttle and The turbocharger has a number of advantages over the internally mixture control driven supercharger: 
¦ 
No power is taken from the engine to drive the turbocharger. 

¦ 
The drive train is less complex and the whole system is lighter. 

¦ 
As engine RPM increase, the velocity of the exhaust gas will 



Exhaust increase so increasing the speed of the impeller and thus the system amount of boost. 
Turbochargers have one principal disadvantage. The turbine is driven by the exhaust gases, so it takes a short but finite time to spool up as engine RPM are increased. This can lead to a slight Turbocharger 
Intake
delay in delivering the extra boost required, a phenomenon known 
Air intake Alternate Manifold 

as "turbo lag." air intake 
A typical turbocharger installation is shown here. It is considerably smaller and lighter than a conventional supercharger. 

Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
Controlling Turbocharger Output 
The amount of boost delivered to the engine must be controlled to prevent overboosting. On a turbocharger the boost level is controlled not by modifying the throttle butterfly position, but by controlling the speed of the turbocharger impeller. This is done by restricting the amount of exhaust gas directed onto the turbine. 
Very simple turbocharger control systems use a fixed restrictor and a pressure relief valve fitted in the induction manifold. This dumps excess pressure to atmosphere. When the valve operates it triggers an overboost warning light in the cockpit. 
On more sophisticated installations, a waste gate controller is used to direct some of the exhaust gas through a duct which bypasses the turbine. 

The waste gate is a butterfly valve positioned in the exhaust upstream of the turbocharger. By controlling the amount of gas directed to the turbine the output pressure of the impeller can be Note that: maintained. 
¦ 
The waste gate is fitted in parallel with the turbocharger. 

¦ 
The waste gate is upstream from the turbocharger. 



Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
Controlling Turbocharger Output 2 
The waste gate is controlled by a hydraulic waste gate actuator. Engine oil is permanently supplied under pressure to the actuator and returns to the engine via a variable restrictor. 
When the variable restrictor is closed, pressure builds up in the actuator. This forces the actuator piston to move, closing the waste gate. All the exhaust gas is now directed to the turbine, causing it to accelerate. 
When the variable restrictor opens, the pressure in the actuator reduces. The piston returns under spring pressure and the waste gate opens. Exhaust gas is now directed through the bypass. Less gas reaches the turbine so it decelerates. 

Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
Controlling Turbocharger Output 3 
In its simplest form the variable restrictor is controlled by a sealed aneroid capsule which is exposed to manifold pressure. 
When manifold pressure increases the aneroid capsule contracts. The restrictor opens, the piston returns under spring pressure and the waste gate opens. Turbocharger output is reduced. 
If the throttle is opened, pressure sensed by the aneroid capsule, drops. The aneroid capsule expands to close off the restrictor. Pressure builds in the actuator and the piston moves to close the waste gate. More exhaust gas is now directed to the turbine which increases speed. 
This process continues until a point of equilibrium is reached between oil and spring pressure in the actuator. 
Using this method the controller maintains a constant pressure in the inlet manifold up to the throttle butterfly. However, it takes an appreciable time for any drop in manifold pressure to be translated into an increase in compressor output. Consequently it takes a finite time to achieve a new power setting demanded by the throttle. This is the cause of turbocharger lag. 

Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 

"'' 11.1""u.1 r,,11.11.uu'­
For a given power setting, the point will eventually be reached where the waste gate controller has completely closed the waste gate, in its attempt to sustain manifold pressure. Above this altitude manifold pressure, and thus engine power, will reduce. 
Critical altitude is reached when the turbocharger can no longer sustain the maximum outlet pressure from the turbocharger compressor. Critical altitude might be defined as the altitude at which the throttle reaches full open and the engine is still producing full rated power. This term is associated with turbochargers. Notice also that says, 'still producing' this is because the turbocharged engine can produce its rated power from ground level up to critical altitude. 
There is a further complication. Because all the exhaust now has to enter the turbine, exhaust back pressure increases which causes a reduction in volumetric efficiency. Engine power for a given value of MAP will decrease this is the opposite to what happens in an internally supercharged or in a normally aspirated engine. 
The image opposite combines the supercharger power curves with the turbocharger curves. In this case, the turbocharger is altitude boosted allowing the engine to maintain sea level power to its Critical Altitude above which power decays in the same manner as a normally aspirated engine. 
, ····} Power for ~.~ •~ • , ··· Supercharger
: 
Power (HP) Normal 
Aspirated Altitude Altitude 

Engine 
10K 20K 30K Altitude 

Altitude boosted turbochargers are popular in the USA because many central states airfields are at high altitudes. For example, Leadville in Colorado has an elevation of almost 10 000 ft. The altitude boosted turbocharger provides the same take-off power at most airports. 
Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
Operation During Various Flight Phases 
Engine Start: During start the waste gate is held open because of the spring pressure acting on the actuator piston. 
Idle Power:At idle power manifold pressure is low and there is little exhaust gas. The waste gate moves to the fully closed position. All available pressure is directed to the turbine but there is insufficient exhaust to achieve maximum compressor output pressure. 
Take-off: At take-off the waste gate is partially open. 
Climb: During a climb at constant power, the waste gate will tend to close as the air density decreases. Turbine RPM will increase. 
Critical Altitude: The waste gate is fully closed. The turbine is at maximum speed. 
Above Critical Altitude: The waste gate is fully closed, compressor outlet pressure cannot be maintained and the maximum value of MAP will reduce. 
In the simple system described above the waste gate controller is known as a single controller or absolute pressure controller (APC). The APC prevents turbocharger pressure from exceeding the design maximum pressure. 

A more sophisticated version ofthe single controller uses a variable pressure controller. A throttle-operated cam modifies the effect of the aneroid capsule to produce a manifold pressure that is related to power setting. 
Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 

Dual Pressure Control Unit System 
The single controller system is inefficient. It is designed to maintain a constant discharge pressure from the turbocharger regardless of the actual MAP required. So at MAP values lower than maximum the turbocharger may be running faster than it needs to. 
To overcome this problem a second controller is normally added. This controller is sensitive to the difference in pressure across the throttle butterfly. In other words the difference between the compressor outlet pressure and manifold pressure. Its purpose is to eliminate any difference between outlet and manifold pressure. 
A diaphragm in the controller senses turbocharger outlet pressure on one side and manifold pressure on the other. The diaphragm is connected to a bleed valve. If manifold pressure drops below turbocharger outlet pressure, the diaphragm distorts and opens the bleed valve. Oil pressure drops and the waste gate opens until turbocharger outlet pressure reduces sufficiently to restore the diaphragm to its neutral position. 

Carburettor butterfly valve 


Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 

Dual Pressure Control Unit System 
The differential controller controls the waste gate at all throttle positions except fully open. This last task falls to the density 

Carburettor controller. butterfly valve 
The density controller is sensitive to both temperature and pressure and prevents the turbocharger from exceeding the upper limit of manifold air pressure below the critical altitude at the full throttle position. 
The two controllers operate independently to control the turbocharger operation at all throttle positions. At less than full throttle the differential controller also reduces the possibility of an unstable operating state known as "bootstrapping" in which undemanded power changes can occur. 


Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
lntercoolers 
One of the drawbacks of any supercharging device is that the compressed air entering the engine is significantly hotter than ambient. This increases the risk of detonation. To overcome this disadvantage an intercooler is sometimes fitted at the induction manifold. 
Cold ram air is ducted from the atmosphere and passed over the induction manifold. Heat from the manifold air is absorbed by the ram air and exhausted overboard thus cooling the mixture. 

Engine Management 
The operating temperature of a supercharged engine is much higher than that of a normally aspirated engine. Consequently the oil and cylinder head temperatures must be monitored carefully. 
Power changes should always be made slowly and smoothly. Rapid throttle movement can cause serious damage. 
To prevent thermal shock when shutting down, the engine should be left to run at low power for long enough to allow its temperature to stabilise. Normally this period is significantly longer than that required for a normally aspirated engine. A turbocharger is particularly prone to damage ifthe engine is shut down before it has had time to cool. 
Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
Engine Instruments 

Piston engine instrumentation may include the following: 
¦ 
RPM Gauge: which measures crankshaft RPM. 

¦ 
Manifold Absolute Pressure (MAP): which measures manifold pressure in inHg. 

¦ 
Boost Pressure Gauge: which measures manifold pressure in PSI. 

¦ 
Oil Pressure Gauge: which measures the oil pressure just after the pressure filter. 

¦ 
Oil Temperature Gauge: which measures the oil temperature between the oil cooler and the pressure pump. 

¦ 
Cylinder Head Temperature Gauge: which measures the temperature of the hottest cylinder. 

¦ 
Exhaust Gas Temperature Gauge: which measures the temperature in the exhaust gas stream. 

¦ 
Fuel Pressure Gauge: which monitors fuel pump outlet pressure on carburettor engines and manifold output pressure on injected engines, both being proportional to fuel flow. 

¦ 
Induction System Temperature Gauge: which measures the temperature at the carburettor inlet. 




Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 

Engine Controls 
Piston engine controls may include: 
¦ 
Throttle Lever, which controls MAP and engine RPM on engines with fixed pitch propellers by altering the position of the throttle butterfly valve. 
¦ 
RPM Lever: which is used on constant speed engines to set the engine/propeller RPM. 
¦ 
Mixture Control: which adjusts fuel flow from the carburettor or fuel injection system. 

¦ 
Carburettor Heat Control: which selects the alternate hot


' ' 
source of air for the carburettor. Carburettor hot air is unfiltered. 
¦ 
Alternate Air. Can be selected on injected engines if the normal filtered air supply becomes blocked. 
¦ Cowl Flap Lever: which adjusts the position of the engine cooling air inlet cowl flaps to regulate the Cylinder Head Temperature (CHT). 
¦ 
Ignition switch. In the OFF position the switch is closed. This earths the magneto's primary circuits. The circuit is connected to ground. 
¦ 
Engine Priming Pump: which is used to pump neat fuel into the inlet manifold to assist engine starting. 
¦ Engine Prime Switch: which controls an electric pump which injects fuel into the inlet manifold to assist starting. 

Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 

FADEC 

Many ofthe engine controls mentioned above are not needed with Full Authority Digital Engine Control (FADEC). Throttle, mixture, IELECTRONIC CONTROL UNIT 11 cowl flaps and ignition can all be combined into one computerised 
ITOP SPARK PLUGI control system. FAD EC has been in existence for many years with gas turbine engines, but piston engines have been curiously slower in introducing this technology. Anecdotal evidence suggests that may be down to resistance to change in the GA pilot community, who did not want to be parted from their mixture and throttle controls. 
FAD EC reduces engine management to a single lever for each engine. The pilot simply selects the power setting required, and the computer schedules the right amount offuel and air, taking into account temperature, humidity, density and limitations. The system also times the ignition spark for the optimum effect. 


Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 


FADEC continued 

Full authority means just that -the computer relieves the pilot of any effort to do with engine management. It will shut the fuel off in IELECTRONIC CONTROL UNIT 11 an emergency. It will schedule exactly the right amount of fuel ­
ITOP SPARK PLUGI even to individual cylinders with a fuel injected engine. Best fuel economy is provided for the desired power setting. 
The electronic engine control (EEC/ECU) is the brain of the FADEC, but the system also needs redundancy for reliability. For that reason FADEC is invariably twin channel, with either channel capable of running its engine. For multi-engine aircraft each engine will have its own FAD EC. Full authority also means that the failure case is potentially hazardous -hence the twin channels. FADEC also needs -in fact must have -its own power supply independent of the aircraft electrical system. That can be a small permanent magnet alternator within the engine driven EEC/ECU, or may even be a battery pack with a longer life than the endurance ofthe aircraft. 

Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 

Engine Handling 
Handling techniques for piston engines vary slightly with engine type but the underlying principles are applicable to all piston engine operations. 
Pre-start Inspection 
The fuel must be checked for water contamination. The water contamination check involves taking fuel samples from one or more drains situated at the lowest point in the fuel system (water is heavier than fuel). The sample is drawn off into a transparent container and visually checked for water. Any water in the sample is unacceptable. More sophisticated methods of checking for water contamination involve visual colour changes on a paste, paper or capsule. Fuel quality checks are carried out before the first flight of the day. 
On inverted or radial engines, the propeller should be pulled through by hand a number of times to check for possible hydraulicing. 
Starting Procedure and Precautions 
¦ 
If the starter warning light remains on for 30 seconds or more after start the engine must be shut down. 

¦ 
Positive engine oil pressure should be indicated within 30 seconds of engine start. 



After-start Checks and Testing 
¦ 
Individual magnetos should be checked after start to ensure that both ignition circuits are working normally. 

¦ 
Because heated carburettor air is usually unfiltered, the carburettor heat should be off when the engine is running on the ground. 

¦ 
Prolonged idling should be avoided because it causes excessive fouling of the spark plugs. 

¦ 
In cold weather the oil is very viscous and doesn't lubricate the engine properly. After start, the engine should be run at minimum power until the oil reaches a specified temperature. 



Procedure for Changing Power Settings 
¦ 
Throttle movements should always be made slowly and smoothly. To reduce the stress on the engine the power should be reduced to max continuous as soon as is safely possible after take-off. 

¦ 
For constant speed propellers the sequence for changing power is remembered by the phrases 'RPM leads power for power up. Power leads RPM for power down' or 'Rev up throttle back'. 



Shutdown Procedure 
¦ The engine should be allowed to cool by running at relatively 
ln1•1 RPt,.A fnr ,:, f.,,., mini 1t,:,c:, h ,:,fnr<> c h, ,t rln1A1n T h ie:, 

Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 

engine operauons. 
Pre-start Inspection 
The fuel must be checked for water contamination. The water contamination check involves taking fuel samples from one or more drains situated at the lowest point in the fuel system (water is heavier than fuel). The sample is drawn off into a transparent container and visually checked for water. Any water in the sample is unacceptable. More sophisticated methods of checking for water contamination involve visual colour changes on a paste, paper or capsule. Fuel quality checks are carried out before the first flight of the day. 
On inverted or radial engines, the propeller should be pulled through by hand a number of times to check for possible hydraulicing. 
Starting Procedure and Precautions 
¦ 
If the starter warning light remains on for 30 seconds or more after start the engine must be shut down. 

¦ 
Positive engine oil pressure should be indicated within 30 seconds of engine start. 

¦ 
In very cold conditions it may become difficult to start the engine. The low temperature increases the viscosity of the oil making the engine more difficult to turn over. 


¦ 
Because heated carburettor air is usually unfiltered, the carburettor heat should be off when the engine is running on the ground. 

¦ 
Prolonged idling should be avoided because it causes excessive fouling of the spark plugs. 

¦ 
In cold weather the oil is very viscous and doesn't lubricate the engine properly. After start, the engine should be run at minimum power until the oil reaches a specified temperature. 



Procedure for Changing Power Settings 
¦ 
Throttle movements should always be made slowly and smoothly. To reduce the stress on the engine the power should be reduced to max continuous as soon as is safely possible after take-off. 

¦ 
For constant speed propellers the sequence for changing power is remembered by the phrases 'RPM leads power for power up. Power leads RPM for power down' or 'Rev up throttle back'. 



Shutdown Procedure 
¦ 
The engine should be allowed to cool by running at relatively low RPM for a few minutes before shut down. This significantly reduces thermal shock. 

¦ 
A dead cut check should always be made before shut down to confirm that both ignition circuits are being properly earthed. 



Supercharging and Piston Engine Handling 
Engine Running Faults 

¦ 
An excessively weak mixture could cause high cylinder head temperatures. This increases the risk of detonation and/or engine damage. 

¦ 
Rough running could be caused by carburettor icing, moisture in the ignition circuit, problems with fuel delivery or uneven compression in the cylinder -for which there may be a number of possible causes. 

¦ 
Black smoke from the exhaust indicates an excessively rich mixture. Black smoke just after start may indicate over priming or an unlocked manual priming pump. 

¦ 
Blue smoke from the exhaust is caused by oil burning. This may indicate worn or broken piston rings. 

¦ 
High cylinder head temperatures during ground running or taxiing may indicate that the cowl flaps have been left closed. 







Lesson 35 
Diesel Engines 

AGK 35 
Diesel Engines 
Diesel Engines 
Design and Construction 
Diesel engines use the heat generated during the compression stroke to ignite the charge. This is why they are sometimes known as 'compression ignition' engines. Ignition occurs spontaneously, so there is no need for spark plugs, distributors and magnetos. 
The other main difference between diesel and petrol engines is the way in which the mixture is created. Diesel engines always use direct fuel injection whereas petrol engines may use a carburettor, direct or indirect fuel injection system. 
To produce a sufficiently high temperature for spontaneous fuel combustion to occur, diesel engines operate at much higher compression ratios than petrol engines typically from about 14: 1 up to about 28:1. This compares with a maximum ratio of about 
9:1 for a petrol engine. This higher compression ratio increases the power output from a given quantity of charge and improves the engine's thermal efficiency. 

Cylinder head 

Fuel injector 
Valve 
Block Glow plug Pre-chamber 
Combustion chamber Piston 
Diesel Engines 
Diesel Fuel 
Aircraft diesel engines use a form of kerosene (Jet A 1) for fuel. Gasoline can't be used because it detonates uncontrollably at such high compression ratios. Diesel fuel is heavier than gasoline -with a specific gravity of about 0.8 to 0.9. It is less volatile and has a higher flash point than AVGAS which makes it a safer and more stable fuel. Its only real disadvantage is that it is a poor lubricant. Consequently the fuel pump must be specially designed to cope with kerosene. 
Kerosene fuels are sometimes categorised according to their cetane number. This indicates the ignition delay which is the time interval between start of injection and the start of combustion. The higher the cetane number the shorter the ignition period. 

Advantages and Disadvantages 
The higher operating pressures require stronger construction which increases the weight of the engine. This has traditionally been a problem because weight is usually of paramount importance. However, the invention of strong, light alloys has allowed designers to create diesel engines with much less weight penalty. 
In consequence, modern relatively light diesel engines offer a number of advantages: 
¦ 
They are inherently more fuel efficient than gasoline engines. 
¦ 
Their heavier build makes them more robust, so they require less scheduled maintenance. 
¦ 
Their more robust build also makes them ideally suited to 
supercharging/turbocharging. 
¦ 
Without the need for an ignition system they are simpler and more reliable. 

¦ 
They use kerosene which is not only cheaper than AVGAS but is less prone to the risk of fire or explosion. 


Diesel Engines 
Principle of Operation 
The four stroke diesel engine operates in a manner very similar to the four stroke petrol engine. 
Induction 
During the induction stroke air rather than mixture is drawn into the cylinder. 
Compression 
The air is compressed. Its temperature and pressure rise significantly. The temperature rise is so great that it would quickly exceed the auto ignition temperature of the fuel. If mixture had been used it would detonate. So a diesel has no option but to introduce the fuel at the very last moment. This is why all diesel engines use fuel injection. 
At the very top of the compression stroke, at TDC, a precisely metered quantity of fuel is injected into the cylinder. It immediately ignites. Again this differs from the petrol engine where ignition begins before TDC. 

Power 
Compared to the power generated by a similar sized petrol engine the force exerted on the piston of a diesel engine is very much greater. This is because, at the point of ignition, the charge is very much more compressed and contained in a much smaller volume. 
Fuel is introduced right at the last moment, so there is no risk of detonation. Therefore, unlike petrol engines, diesels don't normally operate close to the correct stoichiometric ratio they operate much leaner. With a normally lean mixture and no risk of detonation, diesel engines don't require a mixture control lever. 
The power output of the diesel engine is controlled by the amount offuel injected into the cylinder (though some designs may also have a throttle butterfly). This differs from the petrol engine where power is set by adjusting the amount of fuel and air introduced into the cylinder. 
Exhaust 
The exhaust stroke operates in the same way as a petrol engine. Recent publicity about exhaust emissions from diesel cars has made them rather less popular than they might once have been. It is now generally accepted that diesel exhaust emissions are more damaging to health than those from petrol engines. 
Diesel Engines 

Diesel Fuel Injection Systems 
Direct fuel injection systems on diesel engines must cope with the 
r
very high pressures experienced in the cylinder. Typically the injectors must operate at anything up to 24 000 psi and still be able to deliver a fine mist of exactly the right quantity of fuel at exactly the right time. As with other injected piston engines, diesel engines do not require intake heating. 
Two types of injection system are used on aero diesel engines: 
¦ 
Direct Injection. In this system high pressure fuel is fed from a high pressure pump directly to each injector. 

¦ 
Common Rail. Here, a high pressure pump supplies fuel to a common rail from where fuel is distributed to each injector. 


Older diesel engines produce soot from the exhaust due to fuel droplets from the atomiser not burning completely. Most modern 


diesel designs use the common rail system because it results in more efficient combustion, cleaner emissions and quieter operation. One good example is the Thielert Centurion shown here. 
Diesel Engines 
ft.ifl o 
Direct Fuel Injection Systems 
From fuel tank 
The direct fuel injection system comprises an engine driven high 
pressure pump and an injector for each cylinder. 
PRV
The pump must deliver an exactly metered amount of high pressure fuel to the injector at exactly the right point in the cycle. To do this it must be able to: 
¦ Sense engine RPM. 
Throttle lever
¦ 
Sense air density. 

¦ 
Provide a means for advancing and retarding the timing of the fuel pulse. 

¦ 
Rapidly generate a series of fuel pulses of sufficient pressure and deliver them in the appropriate sequence to each injector. 


Injectors 

Diesel Engines 
Injectors 
The injectors are mounted in the cylinder head. They incorporate a mechanically operated spring-loaded poppet valve which opens momentarily whenever the fuel line pressure exceeds the opposing force of the spring. 
Diesel Engines 
"'Ullllll"'II 1'-UII IIIJ"""""LIUII ._,,~L"III~ 
Common rail systems comprise four major components: 
¦ 
A high pressure pump with a pressure regulator and metering valve 

¦ 
A common rail acting as an accumulator for high pressure fuel. 

¦ 
Electro-magnetically operated injectors. 

¦ 
An engine control unit (ECU) which monitors engine conditions and then precisely controls the pressure in the common rail and the opening and closing of the injectors. 


The high pressure pump supplies a constant output of high pressure fuel to the common rail. Unlike the injection pump in direct injection system it doesn't have to generate a series of pulses nor does it need to time the fuel delivery. Its sole purpose is to pressurise the common rail. 
The common rail acts as a reservoir which provides a constant supply of high pressure fuel to each injector. Excess fuel from the rail is returned via a cooler to the aircraft fuel system. 
The injectors are electrically controlled. A solenoid valve in each opens and closes on command from the engine control unit. 
The engine control unit monitors the key engine parameters including the speed and position of the cam and crankshafts to calculate and 
ft+tiio 
Pressure Pressuresensor 
Sensors 

adjust the output of the high pressure pump and the timing of the injectors. 
The great advantage of this system is that the two functions: generating high pressure fuel, and delivering metered quantities to the cylinders are now separate. This greatly simplifies the pump design. 

Fuel tank 
Diesel Engines 
ft+i=tfio 
Glow Plugs 
Diesel engines can be difficult to start when cold. This is because in cold conditions the temperature rise on the compression stroke may not be enough to raise the air temperature above the auto ignition temperature of the fuel. 
To overcome this problem some diesel engines are fitted with glow plugs to increase the temperature in the combustion chamber. There are two types of glow plug: 
Sheathed Glow Plug. The sheathed glow plug contains an electrically heated coil encased in a sheath filled with magnesium oxide powder. The powder protects the coil from vibration and the damaging environment of the combustion chamber. 
Ceramic Glow Plug. The ceramic glow plug, shown here, comprises a special heating element with a very high melting point encased in silicon nitrite. Silicon nitrite is a particularly good heat conductor, so the preheating time is very short. The material can also withstand rapid heating for long periods of time. Consequently this type of glow plug is more heat resistant and longer-lasting than the sheathed type. 
Glow plugs are powered from the battery. A cockpit warning light illuminates to indicate their operation. 

Diesel Engines 
Power to Weight Ratio 
Compared to a gasoline engine of similar size the aircraft diesel engine has a lower power to weight ratio. 

Diesel Engine Cooling Systems 
Diesel engines require more cooling than their petrol engine equivalents. Although air cooling can be used, most modern designs use a liquid cooling system. 
Liquid cooling systems use a mixture ofwater and antifreeze. Coolant is pumped around passages within the engine and returned to a storage tank via a thermostatically controlled valve. An air cooled heat exchanger located in the intake helps to disperse the heat energy absorbed by the coolant. 


Lesson 36 
Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 

AGK 36 

Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 
ft+1&11o 
Gas Turbine Engines 
Propeller driven aircraft are limited to a practical top speed of about 400 KT. Beyond this speed propellers are unable to impart a sufficiently large acceleration to the air to generate thrust efficiently. Remember that thrust force is the product of the mass of the air times the acceleration given to it. 
The only efficient way to achieve higher speeds is to impart a greater acceleration to the air. This is the purpose of the jet or "gas turbine" engine. 
Modern gas turbine engines produce huge quantities of thrust by accelerating very large masses of air rearwards. For example, on take-off a Rolls Royce Trent engine ejects 1000 kg of air every second! Gas turbine engines also produce power. Internal turbines continuously drive compressors and, of course, on turboprops they also drive the propeller, either directly or indirectly. 




Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 
ft+ii1-lo 
Creating Jet Thrust 
Like all aircraft propulsion systems, the jet engine creates thrust by giving momentum to a mass of air or gas. According to Newton's 3rd Law, if we expel a mass of air rearwards there will be an equal and opposite reaction forwards. 
Jet propulsion in its simplest form is seen when an inflated balloon is released. The rapid expulsion of air from the neck of the balloon results in an equal and opposite reaction force on the inner surface of the balloon. This force is called thrust and causes the balloon to be propelled forward. 
It is important to appreciate that this propulsive force is solely the result ofthe reaction to the mass of air exiting the balloon. In no sense is the balloon achieving any thrust by "pushing" against the air. If we released our balloon in the vacuum of space it would still move forward. 

Tension in rubber of the balloon 
When released
provides the energy to expel the 
the air exits
mass of air at highvelocity 
at high velocity

from the neck of the balloon 

/ 


Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 
ft+1I1-lo 
Simple Gas Turbine Engines 
A simple gas turbine engine generates thrust much like a balloon. By expelling air rearwards, it produces an equal and opposite reaction forwards. But unlike a balloon, gas turbines use heat, 
rather than tension, to expel the gases. 
As in a piston engine, four operations are carried out on the air: compression, combustion, expansion and exhaust. When all four processes occur continuously, as in a jet engine, this is called the Brayton Cycle. When they occur one after the other, as in a piston engine, it is called the Otto Cycle. 
Intake Compressor Combustion Turbines Exhaust chamber
Air is drawn in through an intake and enters a compressor. The compressed gas leaves the compressor and enters a combustion chamber where fuel is added and the mixture is burned. The hot gases generated by combustion then rapidly exit through the exhaust section. As they exit they pass through a turbine which extracts some of the energy from the gas stream to power to the compressor. 


Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 
Simple Gas Turbine Engines 2 
The aft section of the exhaust pipe usually forms a convergent duct known as a propelling nozzle or jet nozzle. This duct increases the speed ofthe gas flow exiting the engine. 
The amount ofthrust produced depends on two factors: the mass of air that is accelerated and the acceleration given to it. This can be expressed as an equation: 
Thrust = mass x velocity or T = MV 
Where M = mass flow expressed in kg/sand V = change in velocity through the engine, in other words, the difference between inlet and outlet velocity. So a more accurate rendition of the formula is: 
Thrust= M X (VJet -VFlight) 
Where M is the mass flow of the air, V Jet is the speed ofthe jet exhaust and VFlight is the speed of the air entering the engine (i.e. the forward speed of the aircraft) 
Notice from this formula that we can achieve the same thrust (at slow airspeed) either by accelerating a large mass of air relatively slowly or a small mass of air very quickly. 
Intake Compressor Combustion Turbines Exhaust chamber 

Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 
ft+ii1-lo 
Simple Gas Turbine Engines 3 
If the propelling nozzle is choked (i.e. no further increase in velocity can be obtained unless there is a temperature increase), then the static pressure of the gas stream at exit increases above 
atmospheric pressure. This pressure difference gives what is known as known as pressure thrust. 
This thrust can be calculated using the equation: 
Pressure Thrust= A(p -PO) 
Where A is the nozzle area, p is the nozzle static pressure and PO 
Intake Compressor Combustion Turbines Exhaust
is atmospheric pressure. 
chamber 
Therefore, total thrust of this engine is: 
Thrust= M x (VJet-V Flight) + A(p -PO) 
Jet thrust and power must not be confused. Power is the rate of doing work and is calculated by multiplying force x speed. Just before the take-off roll begins the aircraft is stationary. The engine may be creating very high thrust but the aircraft is producing no power! In fact the EASA Learning Objectives (LOs) state that "thrust can be considered to remain approximately constant over the whole aeroplane subsonic speed range". 


Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 
ft+H+lo 
Pressure, Temperature and Velocity in the Working Cycle 
This diagram shows how pressure, temperature and velocity change in a typical turbojet engine. 
There are a number of important points to note: 
Compressor: The pressure increases as air travels through the compressor. Air cannot normally flow from a low to a high pressure area, so to ensure that flow is maintained, the entire unit is contained within a convergent annulus. The convergence is designed to keep the air at a near constant velocity, and thus overrides the tendency of the air to flow back to the intake. The convergence is achieved by either reducing the diameter ofthe outer casing, increasing the diameter of the hub, or a combination of both. 
Diffuser: A divergent duct is created between the compressor and combustion sections. This is the area of highest pressure in the engine. The primary purpose of the diffuser is to reduce the axial velocity of the air for combustion. 
Propelling nozzle 
A;,;o~k• ~ 
Compression Combustion Expansion Exhaust 
2000 2000 
100 1500 1500 75 
Pressure 
1000 1000 50 25

500 500 :=::::==~======T=em=p=e-ra_tu_reL _----1 0 0 0 Temperature (°C) Pressure (lb/in2) Velocity (ft/sec) 
Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 

Pressure, Temperature and Velocity continued 
Combustion Area: Combustion is continuous and takes place at approximately constant pressure. For this reason gas turbines are sometimes known as constant pressure engines. 
The pressure in the combustion chamber is lower than the pressure ofthe air exiting the diffuser. Otherwise the flow through the engine would reverse. 
The highest engine temperatures are generated in the combustion chamber. 
The exit from the combustion chamber forms a convergent duct. Gas velocity increases as it exits the combustion chamber and enters the guide vanes. 
Turbine: One or more stages in the turbine extract energy from the gas stream. The overall effect is a decrease in temperature, pressure and velocity. To ensure that the air can flow without the risk of being 'choked', the annulus in the turbine section is divergent. 
Exhaust Section: In the particular exhaust design shown on the right, pressure continues to fall whilst velocity rises slightly. As we shall see later, this is not necessarily typical of a modern exhaust system. However, this is the diagram currently shown in exam papers. 
Propelling nozzle 

\ 
Air intake Compression Combustion Expansion Exhaust 
2000 2000 100 751500 1500 Fla,~e
Pressure
1ooo 1ooo temperature 

50 25

500 500 =::===~Ve~lo:c:=it=y====T=em==p=e-ra_tu_reL _--....1 0 0 0 Temperature (°C) Pressure (lb/in2) Velocity (ft/sec) 
Propelling Nozzle: Velocity increases markedly at the propelling nozzle. 
Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 
Factors Affecting Thrust 
The most obvious way of increasing thrust is to increase engine RPM. The faster the engine turns the greater the mass flow through the engine. 
However, thrust depends on the mass of air being accelerated, therefore anything which affects the mass of air or its acceleration will affect the thrust produced. 
¦ 
Altitude. Air density varies directly with humidity, altitude and temperature so less thrust will be produced at high altitude and in hot and humid conditions. At altitude the reduction in density is the predominating influence, more than offsetting any benefit gained from the lower temperature. Above the tropopause where temperature is constant the rate of thrust loss increases. 

¦ 
Speed. Aircraft speed also affects the mass flow. At high speeds (greater than M0.4) the engine benefits from a ram effect. At these speeds air becomes compressible, producing an area of relatively high pressure in the intake. The ram effect more than offsets any reduction in thrust caused by drag. As pressure rises so does temperature, and eventually temperatures at the turbine will limit maximum thrust. On a turbo-propeller engine, increased air mass flow causes engine shaft power to increase with speed. 


¦ 
Ambient Temperature. Temperature affects the mass of air entering the engine and the operating temperature of the turbine. High ambient temperatures reduce thrust and engine power. On a very cold day the engine may produce more thrust or power than it or the airframe can safely take. Such engines are called 'flat rated'. Below a certain temperature fuel flow to the engine is restricted. Flat rated engines are limited at temperatures below ISA +15°C 

¦ 
Engine Bleed. Air taken from the engine to power other aircraft systems will reduce the mass flow through the engine and thus reduce thrust. 

¦ 
Intake Heating. Heating systems will reduce the air density and so reduce mass flow through the engine. 



Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 
ft+W+lo 
Factors Affecting Thrust continued 
Maximum thrust is produced when the aircraft is stationary on the ground "static thrust". This is because the difference between VJet and VFlight is at its greatest, as is the air density. The imperial unit of thrust is the pound (lb). The SI unit offorce is the newton (N). 
Like the pressure volume diagram for the piston engine we can create a graphical representation of volume against temperature. The area bounded within these lines represents the total work done on the air and corresponds to the thrust being produced. 
Burning more fuel would increase the temperature and accelerate the air faster. This would extend the combustion line (B-C) increasing the area and thus increasing thrust. But in practice it is very difficult to achieve higher temperatures because the jet engine is already operating close to the thermal limit ofthe turbine blades. The only practical option is to increase the capacity and compression ratio of the compressor section. 


Air expands during combustion 
B--------
C 
Air expands through turbine & propelling nozzle 
Pressure of air increased by compressors 

A Air enters engine intake D 
Volume 

Introduction to Gas Tu rbine Engines 

The Drive for Greater Engine Efficiency 
Profit margins are thin in commercial aviation so huge effort has been devoted over the years towards making jet engines more efficient. Before we look at why they have evolved into their current designs we must first understand the causes of, and remedies for, gas turbine inefficiencies. 


Specific Fuel Consumption 
The overall efficiency of the engine is usually expressed in terms of its specific fuel consumption (SFC) and its propulsive and thermal efficiencies. SFC is the ratio of fuel mass consumed to produce a unit of thrust per unit of time. The lower the SFC the better. Engines with higher compression ratios have lower SFC. 
Modern jet transport aircraft cruise at much higher altitudes than piston aircraft. This is because a gas turbine engine works more efficiently at higher altitudes. As pressure altitude increases, air density reduces. As a result, the mass flow reduces, and so maximum thrust reduces with increased pressure altitude. 
Compressors work more efficiently at higher rotational speeds. Therefore, to maintain a given value of thrust as altitude increases, compressors must rotate faster. Less fuel is required to spin the compressor faster as the less dense air reduces the resistance to turning. 
There is an optimum altitude for a jet aircraft to operate efficiently in respect of its speed and thrust required. This altitude increases as aircraft weight reduces. Maintaining a constant TAS as altitude increases results in a reduction in fuel flow and SFC from sea level up to the optimum altitude. 
Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 
ft+ii&1to 
The Effects of Altitude and Speed 

These charts show the effects of altitude and 
8000 speed on thrust and SFC. 
7000 

cf! 6000 ._;; 8000 f----+--+--+------,P-....;::-+---t 
2 .s 
5000 
~ 4000 .s j 3000
0.9 
0.8 


100 200 300 400 500 600 
KT 



Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 
Thermal Efficiency 
Thermal efficiency describes the efficiency with which fuel energy is converted to kinetic energy. Thermal efficiency is determined by combustion temperature and pressure ratio. A long trail of hot exhaust gas left in the wake of a jet airliner represents thermal inefficiency work has been done to heat the atmosphere rather than drive the aircraft forward. Gas turbine engines are about 30% thermally efficient. 

Propulsive Efficiency 
Propulsive efficiency describes the efficiency with which kinetic energy is translated into propulsive force. This is affected by the amount of kinetic energy wasted by engine. The turbulent energetic air left in the wake of a jet engine is an example of propulsive inefficiency. Work has been done to agitate the air rather than propel the aircraft. The propulsive efficiency of an engine is expressed as: 
work done 7 (work done + work wasted in the exhaust) 

At low speeds the high velocity exhaust from a turbo-jet wastes considerably more energy than the slow slipstream from a propeller. Propeller systems are therefore more efficient at low speeds. At higher speeds the situation changes. The exhaust gas velocity remains high but its speed compared to the relative airflow is much reduced. 


Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 
Propulsive Efficiency continued 
Jet engines become much more efficient as forward speed increases. Some modern engine designs can achieve propulsive efficiencies between 80-90%. 
These considerations result in different engine designs to suit different operational requirements. You will recall that thrust depends on the extra velocity added to the air stream. So to achieve very high forward speeds, military fast-jet aircraft require engines that produce a high-speed jet exhaust. 
At the more moderate speeds required by conventional airliners there is considerable scope for the engine designerto increase propulsive efficiency by reducing the kinetic energy given to the exhaust stream. In other words, by applying a relatively small acceleration to a large mass of air. 
This has another key advantage. Small accelerations can be produced by propellers or, in the case ofthe modern jet engine, by large fans driven by a jet core. The wake produced by the fan is cold and relatively free of turbulence and noise so the mechanical and thermal efficiency of the fan is an order of magnitude better than a turbojet. Hence the almost universal popularity of designs which use a fan or a propeller. 
Propulsive 
Efficency % 
Airspeed m.p.h 
Propulsive 
Efficency % 
Airspeed m.p.h 
80 60 40 20 
0 
80 60 40 20 
0 
r t 
Contra-rotating fan 
r + + r + +
t } t 
200 400 600 800 1,000 
By-pass turbo-jet By-pass turbo-jet (high by-pass ratio) (low by-pass ratio)

+ 
200 400 600 800 1,000 

Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 
Types of Gas Turbine Engines 
For historical completeness we will start with the single-spool axial flow turbo-jet. This type ofjet was typical of early designs and is really only efficient for very high speed flight. No commercial airliner uses this design. It is inherently inefficient at airliner cruise speeds and the very high velocity exhaust gases create unacceptable noise levels. 
Single Spool Axial Flow Turbojet 
The term 'spool' is used to describe an assembly comprising a 

compressor and turbine connected by a shaft. "Axial flow" Intake Compressor Combustion Turbines Exhaust chamber
describes the passage of air through the engine -directly from front to rear along the engine's axis. 
In this example three turbine rotors are connected by a single shaft to the eight rotors of the compressor to form a single spool. This simple design produces a very high velocity exhaust from a relatively small mass of air. Its small frontal area produces low drag for high speed flight. 

Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 
Twin Spool Bypass Turbojet 
Bypass engines improve efficiency by giving a smaller acceleration to a larger mass of air. In this design some of the air bypasses the inner section, the core of the engine and is given only a relatively small acceleration by the Low Pressure (LP) compressor, the fan. 
To work efficiently the LP compressor must operate at a relatively low rotational speed. By contrast the High Pressure (HP) compressor in the core needs to rotate at high speed. 
To cater for these differing needs the two compressors are mounted on separate spools, each driven by their own turbine section. Notice that the HP compressor is connected to the HP turbine and the LP compressor is connected to the LP turbine. The slower rotating LP compressor requires less energy so it is powered by the rear LP turbine. The high speed HP compressor requires very high energy gas so it is driven by a turbine stage located immediately behind the combustion chamber. 
The proportion of air entering the bypass compared to that entering the core is known as the bypass ratio. In this particular design, the proportion of air bypassing the core is relatively small. This engine has a low bypass ratio. 
Twin-spool bypass turbojet 
Mass flow core 
Mass flow bypass duct 

The ratio is quite simple to calculate. A bypass ratio of 10: 1, for example, means that for every 10 kg of air through the bypass, 1 kg of air goes through the core of the engine. 
Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 
Twin Spool Bypass Turbojet Advantages 
Twin-spool bypass turbojet
Bypass engines have several advantages: 

¦ 
The bypass air does not need to be combusted to achieve its Mass flow core acceleration. Since no fuel is needed to heat the air, the design is inherently more thermally efficient. 

¦ 
The bypass air is given a smaller acceleration so its propulsive efficiency is greater at lower speeds. 

¦ 
The two compressor sections are more efficient because both run at their optimal speed. 

¦ 
As less air enters the core, this section is smaller and so reduces overall weight. 

¦ 
The bypass air shrouds the high velocity core air resulting in a significant reduction in noise. 



Mass flow bypass duct 


Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 

Triple Spool High Bypass Ratio Turbo Fans 

Triple spool turbofan engine
A triple spool high bypass ratio turbo-fan develops the bypass 
HP HP 
compressor turbine
concept almost to its logical conclusion. The engine has a very 
I NJ

,.,....__..,Ihigh bypass ratio-occasionally exceeding 5:1. A third spool is 
added to power a very large diameter fan. An Intermediate 
;._-~ 
Pressure (IP) compressor and an HP compressor are located in the core. The core drives the fan which may now produce as much as 90% of the thrust. 
With multiple spools a single term "engine RPM" can no longer be used because each spool rotates at a different speed. Most turbofan engine controls have indicators to show the speed of the LP fan and at least one of the core spools. 
IP compressor
The SI symbol for rotational speed is the letter N. So the speeds ofthe various spools are labelled from N 1 at the front of the 
LP fan N1 LP turbine 
engine to N3, the HP compressor in the core. 

Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 
Turbo-Propeller and Turboshaft Engines 
At airspeeds up to about 300 KT and at medium altitudes a conventional propeller is more efficient than a turbofan engine. So, for slow speed aircraft, gas turbine engines can be used to drive a propeller. This requires extra turbine stages which extract almost all the energy contained in the exhaust gas. These are "turbo-propeller" or "turboprop" engines. The same design logic can be used to extract power to drive a helicopter rotor. These are known as "turboshaft" engines. 
You may be wondering why these engines bother to use a gas turbine core at all. Remember that gas turbines operate on a process of continuous combustion and consequently have a much greater power-to-weight ratio than piston engine. 
Gas turbine engines rotate at very high speed so this type of turbo-prop design uses a reduction gearbox to drive the propeller in its optimum speed range. 

Centrifugal compressor turbo propeller arrangement 
Reduction gearbox to reduce propeller speed 

Shaft Horse Power+ Jet Thrust= Equivalent Shaft Horse Power (ESHP) 
Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 
Turbo-Propeller and Turboshaft Engines continued 
On early designs centrifugal compressors were used. These are still used on some helicopter turbo-shaft designs where overall engine length is an issue. 
Most of the energy is extracted by the turbines to produce torque measured as "shaft horsepower", the power delivered to the shaft driving the propeller or rotor. But some residual thrust may be obtained from the gases leaving the exhaust. The overall contribution of shaft horsepower and residual thrust is measured in units of Equivalent Shaft Horse Power (ESHP). 
This diagram shows an early turboprop engine with two centrifugal compressors on a single spool. The type is known as a "direct couple" engine because the single spool is mechanically connected to the propeller. This has some inherent disadvantages. The propeller produces significant rotational drag, which can lead to problems maintaining the flow of air through the engine when it tries to accelerate. For the same reason engine starting may be more problematic. 

Centrifugal compressor turbo propeller arrangement 
Reduction gearbox to reduce propeller speed 

Shaft Horse Power+ Jet Thrust= Equivalent Shaft Horse Power (ESHP) 
Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 
Free Turbine Engines 
Twin spool turbo-propeller engines help to get around this problem. One of the most common types is the free turbine engine. The propeller is driven via the LP turbine allowing greater flexibility in operation of the HP spool. The mechanical link between the gas generator and the propeller turbine is removed, so each element is free to rotate at its optimum speed. This results in improved power generation and helps to relieve the load on the engine during start. 
The pilot's power lever controls fuel flow, gas temperature, RPM and torque of the gas generator. The propeller control lever controls the RPM of the free turbine. If a free power turbine overspeeds, it can result in bursting of the free power turbine disc. 

Free power turbine engine Free power turbine 
Drive to gearbox for helicopter rotor or propeller 
Compressor &turbine of gas generator section Exhaust 

Introduction to Gas Turbine Engines 

Principal Components 

Principal components of a gas turbine engine
The principal components of a jet engine installation are the: 

¦ Air inlet or "intake". Compressor 
Turbine 
¦ 
Compressor. 

¦ 
Combustion chamber. 

¦ 
Turbine. 

¦ 
Exhaust and propelling/jet nozzle. 


Each section usually forms a self-contained unit. This modular construction method makes it possible to change sections without dismantling the entire engine. 

We will look at each of these components in more detail in the following lessons. Inlet 
Three spool high-bypass ratio turbofans are mostly made by Rolls Royce. Other companies such as CFM produce two-spool high­bypass ratio turbofans. 




Lesson 37 
Inlet and Compressor Design 

AGK37 
Inlet and Com pressor Design 
ftiihi-lo 
Air Inlets 
The air inlet or "intake" is technically not an engine component but is part of the airframe or engine installation. However, its function is so crucial to the engine's performance that we must consider it. The purpose ofthe inlet is ensure under all operating conditions that 
¦ 
the engine receives the correct quantity of air 

¦ 
air is delivered to the engine with the minimum energy loss 

¦ 
the airflow to the engine is uniform and free of turbulence 

¦ 
the compressor receives air at a uniform pressure, evenly distributed across the entire inlet area 

¦ 
the installation causes minimum drag. 






Inlet and Compressor Design 
Subsonic Inlets 
Subsonic aircraft use a short pitot-type inlet because this shape makes full use of the pressure rise caused by the ram air effect. The inlet comprises three sections: the lip, the throat and the diffuser. 
The lip is shaped to reduce the risk of flow separation in crosswinds and when operating at high incidence angles. The throat forms a slightly convergent duct which leads to the diffuser. The diffuser forms a slightly divergent duct to generate an increase in pressure at the compressor inlet. 
The inner surface is usually profiled as one smooth continuous curve to minimise the risk of generating turbulent flow. 
When the aircraft is at rest with the engine running, air is drawn in from directly ahead, abeam and even behind the plane of the intake lip. 
A significant crosswind across the face of the intake can disrupt the smooth inflow and lead to problems in the compressor. A "hot" or "hung" start may result. A similar problem can occur at the start of a take-off in a strong cross wind. Inlet instability can cause the engine to surge when it attempts to accelerate. The risk of surge is reduced by carrying out a rolling take-off. Strong in flight turbulence, particularly at lower in flight speeds, can increase the chances of surge or flameout. 
ftiihi-lo 
Pitot intake 
Inlet and Compressor Design 
Subsonic Inlets -the Effect of Airspeed 
At low airspeeds, the airflow approaching the lip is larger in cross-section than the inlet. This steadily reduces as speed increases so that the two flows are equal by the time the inlet reaches its design Mach number. At low airspeeds high sideslip angles or a high angle of attack may cause intake airflow instability which can lead to an engine surge. 
A further problem may occur at low airspeeds and high power settings. The velocity ofthe air leading into the inlet may approach Mach 1, at which point the inlet becomes "choked". To alleviate this problem older designs sometimes incorporated secondary air doors around the circumference of the inlet. These open against spring pressure to admit more air into the inlet. Secondary air doors are uncommon on modern inlet designs because of their unacceptable noise levels. 
At high airspeeds the inflow may exceed the capacity ofthe engine so the excess air spills over the lip. Above about 0.85 Mach, shock waves may form as the air accelerates through the intake throat. 

ft.IFl-lo 
Low speed 
Design mach number 
High subsonic speed 
Inlet and Compressor Design 
Subsonic Inlets -Effect of Inlet Condition and FOD 
The slightest change in inlet conditions can have a marked effect on the engine. Any damage to the lip or ice formation in and around the lip of the inlet can be a serious problem. Even small amounts of ice can disrupt the laminar flow of air into the engine and cause problems at the compressor. In extreme cases it can starve the engine of air, leading to combustion failure "flameout". Furthermore, serious damage can be caused to the compressor if large chunks of ice break off and enter the engine. For this reason the lip is heated, usually with bleed air from the engine. 
A large jet engine draws in very large quantities of air even at idling speed. This creates a suction zone which may extend for several metres around the intake. 
Debris, or even people, entering the suction zone can be drawn into the engine. Even very small debris can cause catastrophic damage to the fan, compressor and turbine blades. Foreign Object Damage, or FOO as it is more commonly known, is a serious operating hazard for jet engines, especially those which are mounted close to the ground in underwing pods. Strenuous efforts are made to keep the aircraft manoeuvring areas as free as possible from loose debris. 

All personnel involved with jet engine operations must be aware of the danger posed by the suction effect of the intake. On some aircraft a diagram showing the shape and dimensions of the danger area is painted onto the engine nacelle. 
Inlet and Compressor Design 
ftiiffi-lo 
Supersonic lntets 
At supersonic speeds the pitot-type inlet generates a severe shockwave at the lip which makes it impracticable for use at high speeds. 
The jet engine can only cope with air entering the compressor at subsonic speed. So at supersonic speeds the intake must provide some means of slowing the air without incurring a large drag penalty. 
The "multi-shock" inlet slows the air in steps using a series of small oblique shockwaves. There are two types of multi-shock inlet: 
¦ 
External/Internal compression intake. 

¦ 
Variable throat intake. 




Since the demise of Concorde, neither type of inlet is used in current civil designs. Concorde used a form of variable throat. More exotic designs such as the Lockheed SR-71 high altitude reconnaissance aircraft have an external internal compression intake which uses a prominent cone located in the mouth of the intake. 
Inlet and Compressor Design 
Compressors 
The purpose ofthe compressor is to increase the mass flow through the engine by pressurising the air. During compression, energy (pressure energy) is added to the air and its volume is reduced. A well designed compressor will perform this work efficiently and minimise the load on its associated turbine. The less work the turbine has to do to drive the compressor, the more energy will be left in the gas stream to be converted into thrust. 
Compressor performance is usually described in terms of its pressure ratio. Pressure ratio is the ratio of absolute compressor delivery (output) pressure to absolute compressor inlet pressure. For example, if the outlet pressure was 65 psi and the inlet pressure was 14.7 psi then the pressure ratio is 65/14.7 = 4.42. So, the pressure ratio would be 4.42:1 The very latest axial flow compressors typically achieve a pressure ratio of 35: 1. 
Two types of compressor are used: the axial flow and the centrifugal compressor. 
An axial flow compressor is so named because air flows parallel to the axis of the engine. In a centrifugal compressor the air flows radially from the centre of the compressor to its perimeter which is why it is sometimes known as a radial compressor. 
ftiiii-lo 


Inlet and Compressor Design 
ft+Hi-lo 
Centrifugal Compressors 
Centrifugal compressors are similar in appearance and principle of operation to the impeller found in a supercharger. They consist of three main components: 
¦ 
An impeller 

¦ 
A diffuser 

¦ 
A casing which houses both the impeller and diffuser. 


The impeller rotates at very high speed (as much as 40 000 RPM). Air enters the "eye" of the impeller where it is picked up by the rotating vanes and propelled rapidly outwards from the centre by centrifugal force. As it moves from the eye to the circumference of the impeller the air increases in velocity, pressure and temperature. 
The air leaves the impeller tangentially and enters the diffuser vanes. These form a series of divergent ducts which trade some of the air's kinetic energy for pressure energy. 
The impeller and diffuser each account for about half the overall rise in pressure. The pressurised air is then ducted either directly to the combustion chamber or to the eye of a second impeller to generate a further rise in pressure. 

Inlet and Compressor Design 
Centrifugal Compressors continued 
It is important to appreciate that a centrifugal compressor uses mechanical rather than aerodynamic forces to compress the air. This has one very important implication. Centrifugal compressors cannot stall -at least not in any aerodynamic sense of the word. 
The clearance between the rotating impeller and the stationary diffuser section is very carefully controlled. If it were too small it would generate buffeting and if it were too large, pressure would be lost. 
To achieve a greater mass flow the impeller can be double-sided. Air is introduced simultaneously to the eyes of the front and rear impellers and is propelled into a single diffuser section. This design is known as a "double entry" impeller. 
The use of multiple stages to increase the overall compression ratio has proved problematic as the energy losses of directing the air back into further stages is excessive. For this reason, centrifugal compressors are usually limited to single stage, sometimes two stages. This places a severe restriction on the total compression ratio and overall efficiency. 
ft.f:ifilo 

Inlet and Com pressor Design 
ftiiii-lo 
Axial Flow Compressors 
The disadvantages of centrifugal compressors outweigh the advantages. Almost all large commercial designs use an axial flow compressor. 
Principle of Operation 
Like a centrifugal compressor axial flow compressors add kinetic energy to the air and then convert the kinetic energy into pressure energy. A series of aerofoil section blades or "rotors" mounted on a rotating rotor disc accelerate the air towards a set of stationary "stator" blades. The stator blades are arranged to form a series of divergent ducts which convert kinetic energy to pressure energy. Each set of rotors and stators is called a "stage". An axial flow compressor comprises many stages. 

Inlet and Compressor Design 
Principle of Operation 2 
As the air passes across each set of rotors, velocity, pressure and temperature increase. As it passes over each set of stators velocity reduces, and pressure and temperature increase. 
Across the multiple stages of the compressor the overall effect is a steady increase in pressure and temperature whilst velocity remains approximately constant. 
The stators have a second function. Just as in a conventional wing section the air flowing over the aerofoil shaped rotor is slightly deflected. In the context of a wing we would call this downwash. The stators correct the deflection to ensure that the air is presented at the correct angle to the next stage of rotors. 
The pressure rise across a single stage is usually only about 10% or 20%. ( 1.1 : 1 to 1.2: 1) The rise is small because both the rate of diffusion and the angle of deflection must be kept quite low otherwise the blades might stall or cause unacceptable levels of drag. This is why an axial flow compressor requires many stages to achieve a usable level of compression. Compressors usually achieve pressure ratios of up to 35:1 with outlet temperatures up to 600°C. 
Rotor Stator Velocity rises and falls 

Principle of Operation 3  
To keep the flow moving against the steady rise in pressure the entire compressor assembly is located in a convergent duct -the "air annulus". This means the rotors and stators at the high­pressure end of the compressor must be much shorter than those at its inlet. This diagram shows the overall arrangement for a multi-stage axial flow compressor.  Stator vanes  Rotor blade  Main drive shaft from turbine  
Reducing the outer casing diameter and increasing the compressor spool diameter also help to keep the air flowing against nature's tendency to flow from high to low. Rolls Royce delightfully refer to this as 'sweeping water uphill'.  
Intake casing  Variable inlet guide vanes  

Inlet and Compressor Design 
ft.iiifilo 
Inlet and Compressor Design 
Compressor Blade Twist 
The speed and direction ofthe air approaching each compressor blade is determined by factors: the rotational speed of the blade speed (the "circumferential" or "tangential velocity") and the speed of the air flowing along the axis of the engine (the "axial velocity"). 
These two vectors are summed together to give the "absolute velocity" which is the velocity of the air in relation to the rotating blade. The absolute velocity determines the blade's angle of attack. 
These vector components are often depicted in a velocity triangle like the one shown here. 
The tips ofthe compressor blades have a higher tangential velocity than the roots, so the angle of attack on the blade will differ from root to tip. To maintain the optimum angle over its entire length the blade is twisted. The root is set at a higher angle than the tip. The amount of twist is known as the "stagger angle". 

Rotors Stators 
Relative '-.._ 
7 1............._ 
Blade velocity 
~Absolute 
r v'elocity out 
Blade 
velr 


Absolute velocity in 
Inlet and Compressor Design 
Compressor Aerodynamics 
The axial flow compressor has one disadvantage. Because the rotor is an aerofoil it is susceptible to stalling -in much the same way as a wing can stall. If a stage stalls the disruption to the airflow can cause further stages to stall. This can lead to an oscillating breakdown of flow "a surge", or even a complete reversal ofthe airflow through the compressor "a deep surge". 
Gas turbine engines have a very narrow operating band, limited by the air mass flow and the overall pressure ratio. Beyond this operating band the compressor becomes unstable. A well designed compressor provides an adequate safety margin between the normal and unstable operating regions. 
A "compressor map" is a useful way of graphically illustrating the operating margins. Under normal steady-state operation the compressor operates on the "working line". But, during accelerations, the compressor's operating point can move above the working line towards the region of instability. The area of instability is bounded by the "stability line". Here we see a typical compressor map. 
Notice that the safety margin is significantly smaller at low mass flows. 

Unstable area Safety margin 
0 

.:: 
~ ~ 
:::::I Cl) Cl) 
~ 
a.. 
60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 

Air mass flow 

Some compressor maps may show an "acceleration line" which sits between the working and stability lines. This shows the expected operating conditions as the engine accelerates. 
Inlet and Compressor Design 
Variable Inlet Guide Vanes and Variable Stator Vanes 
Each rotor blade is an aerofoil, so its efficiency depends entirely on achieving the optimum angle of attack. Angle of attack is a function of the rotor's rotational speed and the axial speed of flow. At low axial speeds and high rotational speed the angle of attack will be high. The rotor blades are fixed to give an optimum angle of attack at the design operating speed of the aircraft and engine. Consequently, during engine start, with almost no forward speed component, the angle of attack on the first stage rotor blades could exceed their stalling angle. 
To prevent this from happening Variable Inlet Guide Vanes (VIGV) are fitted. These adjust their angle to ensure that air is directed onto the first stage at precisely the correct angle across all operating conditions. 
On some engines the same principle is applied to the stator vanes. Variable Stator Vanes (VSVs) ensure that the air leaving one compressor stage arrives at the next at precisely the correct angle -over the entire operating range ofthe engine. 

Inter-stage Bleed 
In large multi-stage compressors it is also sometimes necessary to include inter-stage bleed valves. During start, whilst the engine is attempting to accelerate, the valves open to vent excess pressure and increase the axial flow across all the stages. This reduction in pressure reduces the load on the compressor by reducing the blade angle of attack in the early stages. This effectively brings the compressor away from the stability line and towards the working line. 
Multiple Spool Designs 
Triple spool systems are now a common feature of modern jet engines. Multiple spool designs have two major advantages: they allow High Pressure (HP), Intermediate (IP) and Low Pressure (LP) compressors to run at their individual optimal speeds and they help to reduce the need for complex air control systems to ensure stable airflow. 
Inlet and Compressor Design 
Compressor Stall 
Despite all these precautions compressor blades can and do stall. Blade stall can be triggered by 
• 
damage to the blades, usually caused by ingesting debris 

• 
ice formation on the blades 

• 
extreme incidence angles, usually caused by strong crosswinds on take-offor high sideslip angles. 


If the stall is severe the consequent aerodynamic instability can spread from one stage to the next until all the stages of the compressor stall. 
A stall will result in reduced air mass flow through the compressor and thus reduced thrust. Iffuel continues to be pumped into the combustion chamber at the same rate the gas temperature will quickly rise. The principal symptoms of compressor stall are 
• 
high Gas Temperature (EGT) 

• 
reduced thrust 

• 
rumbling or banging from the compressor 

• 
fluctuating RPM and fuel flow. 



Compressor Surge 
If the stall is sufficiently severe, compressor output pressure may fall below the pressure in the combustion chamber. Hot combustion gases now flow back through the compressor. This can trigger an oscillating flow pattern in the compressor as it alternates between being stalled and unstalled. The oscillation frequency is typically about 5 Hz and can be heard as a loud "burble". 
In an extreme case the compressor can experience complete flow reversal in which combustion gases flow all the way through the compressor. Flames may be seen exiting the intake. This phenomenon is known as "deep surge" and is often accompanied by a loud bang. 
A surge is possible even when the compressor is functioning normally. If too much fuel is pumped into the combustion chamber the combustion pressure may rise excessively causing flow reversal. This "over-fuelling surge" was common with very early jet engines on start up or if the pilot attempted to increase thrust too rapidly. 
Modern fuel control units have almost completely overcome the problem by carefully monitoring engine conditions and regulating fuel flow accordingly. 
Inlet and Compressor Design 
Stall and Surge in a Centrifugal Compressor 
A centrifugal compressor is much less likely to suffer from surge but is not immune from the problem. Severe intake icing, damage to the impeller or over-fuelling can cause one. 
Centrifugal compressors cannot stall in any aerodynamic sense, but they can lose output pressure for the reasons given above. 
Avoiding Surge and Stall 
The underlying principle for avoiding compressor stall is to preserve the optimum intake conditions. 
Before flight check the front and rear faces of the fan blades and engine inlets for damage or ice. Ice on the blades must be removed with hot, low pressure, air before engine start. 

Avoid starting in strong crosswinds or tailwinds by requesting a push back into wind. In strong wind conditions and high thrust settings avoid rapid turns on the ground. Consider a rolling take off in strong crosswinds and avoid any flight manoeuvre which is likely to cause an extreme angle of attack at the inlet. 
If a compressor stall occurs, restore stable intake conditions and reduce combustion pressure. In other words return as quickly as possible to straight flight and close the thrust levers. Except in cases of severe damage to the blades these two actions will normally allow the compressor to clear itself. 
Inlet and Compressor Design 
Axial Flow Compressor Construction 
The rotor blades are mounted on a disc which is driven by one of the turbine shafts. Stator blades are usually bolted to the compressor casing. The tips ofthe stators are often joined by a shroud to avoid gas leaks and energy losses around the tip, this also strengthens the blades and reduces vibration. 
Rotor blades are subjected to huge centrifugal forces because of their high rotational velocity. The blades themselves are usually loosely fitted into the disc using a "fir tree" root connection. The loose fit allows the blade to take up a position which depends to some extent on the centrifugal and aerodynamic forces acting on it. This reduces the stresses at the blade root. A bonus is that individual blades can be replaced more easily. 
The loose fit is the cause of the characteristic clicking or "tinkling" sound that a gas turbine makes when it is windmilling slowly on the ground. 
Fir tree root (with shank seals) 
Inlet and Compressor Design 
LP Compressor Blade Construction 
Fan blades are usually made from titanium, or often nowadays from composite materials, increasingly, carbon fibre composites. Some designs include a mid-span support called a "snubber" or "clapper" to prevent aerodynamic instability caused by the blades flapping and bending. 
Wide chord fan blades often avoid the need for snubbers. Composite blades are designed to be flexible enough to withstand birdstrike damage. 
Fan blade showing snubber Wide chord fan blade 
Inlet and Compressor Design 
Centrifugal Versus Axial Flow Compressors 
Axial and centrifugal compressors have advantages and disadvantages which are summarised here. 
A centrifugal compressor 
¦ 
uses an impeller which is relatively easy and cheap to manufacture 

¦ 
is less prone to surge 

¦ 
is less susceptible to foreign object damage 

¦ 
is shorter, and thus well suited to compact engine designs 

¦ 
is reasonably efficient over a range of operating conditions. 


When a small engine is required, APU for example, centrifugal compressors are more efficient than axial flow compressors which suffer from excessive leakage around blade tips. 
But it has significant disadvantages compared with an axial flow compressor 
¦ 
it has a low compression ratio, rarely more than 4.5: 1 compared to at least 35:1 for an axial flow compressor 

¦ 
for a given mass flow it requires a larger frontal area 

¦ 
it is less efficient than an axial flow compressor. 



But an axial flow compressor 
¦ 
is more expensive to manufacture 

¦ 
is vulnerable to foreign object damage 

¦ 
can suffer from aerodynamic instability. 



Axi-Centrifugal (Axi-Cf) Compressors 
Some aircraft engines capitalise on the benefits of both designs by using both types. In the usual arrangement an axial compressor feeds a centrifugal compressor. This design allows relatively high compression ratios from a relatively short engine. 


Lesson 38 
Combustor and Turbine Design 

AGK 38 
Combustor and Turbine Design 
Combustion Systems 
The purpose of a combustion chamber or "combustor" is to mix fuel with the compressed air and burn it efficiently. The chamber must be carefully designed to convert the rapidly expanding volume of air into a steady stream of uniformly heated gas, flowing towards the turbines. This must be accomplished with the minimum loss of pressure and maximum heat release. Combustion efficiencies in the order of 98% are not unusual. 
Unlike a piston engine, combustion does not result in a sharp rise in gas pressure but occurs at constant pressure. This allows the combustor to be lightly fabricated. There are several designs but all of them comprise an inner chamber called the flame tube and an outer air casing. 
Almost all modern gas turbines use a single annular combustion chamber wrapped round the engine core. Older designs, such as the one shown here, used multiple chambers. The operating principle is the same for both. 
ftiihi=-lo 
Air casing 


Combustor and Turbine Design 
Requirements for Combustion 
A combustor must satisfy a number of important and sometimes conflicting requirements. It must: 
¦ 
Ensure high combustion efficiency and maximum heat release. 

¦ 
Provide combustion stability across a wide range of operating conditions including ingestion of rain and hail. 

¦ 
Promote reliable and consistent ignition during start. 

¦ 
Permit in-flight restarting when air is flowing through the chamber. 

¦ 
Ensure that the hot gas leaving the chamber does not exceed the temperature limit of the turbine blades. 

¦ 
Promote low emissions, low fuel consumption and high durability. 


ft+i.i+lo 

Principle of Operation 
Air from the compressor leaves the last stage at high speed. The final stator stage straightens out the flow and feeds into a diffuser section at a velocity of about 150 m/sec. The diffuser converts some ofthe air's kinetic energy into pressure energy allowing the gas to exit the diffuser at higher pressure and lower velocity (110 m/sec). 
Only about 20% ofthe air exiting the diffuser is introduced immediately into the flame tube this is sometimes referred to as the "primary air". The remaining 80%, the "secondary air", flows around the tube and is introduced after combustion has begun. 
Even after diffusion and separation the gas velocity at the combustion chamber inlet (snout) is still much too high (100 m/sec) for stable combustion. This is because kerosene burns with a flame rate of only 3 metres per second. Consequently the entrance to the flame tube incorporates swirl vanes or a "swirler" to force the air to swirl into a doughnut-shaped recirculation vortex. This slows the air sufficiently to allow continuous combustion. The area in which this recirculation occurs is called the primary zone. 
Combustor and Turbine Design 
Principle of Operation 
A fuel injector sprays fuel into the re-circulating air. The combination of spray pattern and turbulent air helps to atomise the fuel. An electric igniter plug starts the combustion process. Once combustion has begun it becomes self-sustaining, so the igniter is switched off. 
Detonation is not a problem in a constant pressure combustor, so air and fuel are burned at the stoichiometric ratio of 15: 1. This results in very hot combustion gases. There are two mixture ratios to be considered at this point in the engine. The first is primary airflow to fuel, our 15: 1 ratio. The second is total airflow within the combustion chamber to fuel, and of course would be a much weaker mixture, as much ofthat secondary air is not intended for combustion. Typically the combustion temperature may peak at 2100°C. This is far hotter than any current material can withstand so these very hot gases must be quickly diluted. This is the function of the secondary air. Secondary air enters through ports in the walls of the flame tube into the "secondary zone". 
The combustion temperature, and hence power output from the engine, is limited by the maximum gas temperature that the turbine section can withstand. This in turn limits the amount of fuel that can safely be burned in the combustion chamber. 
ftiihi=hlo 
Fuel 
Igniter
injector 
Nozzle guide vane 
Diffuser 
Primary zone 


The air in the secondary zone is still too hot to be fed directly onto the turbine blades so more is added in the last third of the flame tube, the "dilution zone". This reduces the temperature of the gases leaving the combustion chamber to between 1000°C and 1500°C. 
Combustor and Turbine Design 
Combustor Design and Construction 
Multiple Combustion Chamber Systems 
Multiple combustion chambers were the first type of combustor to be used on jet engines. Individual chambers are arranged around the engine but are interconnected to equalise the pressure across all the tubes and to ensure that the flame propagates to all chambers during engine start. 


Image Courtesy of Gary Brossett via the Aircraft Engine Historical Society, lnc. 
Combustor and Turbine Design 
ft+++~,­
Tubo-Annular Combustion Chamber 
The tuba-annular or "canannular" combustor shown in this illustration is a hybrid design comprising a number of individual flame tubes fitted inside a single air casing. This design is lighter, more compact and easier to maintain. 

Combustor and Turbine Design 
ft+M+lo 
Annular Combustion Chambers 
The annular combustor comprises a single annular flame tube contained within an inner and outer air casing. It is shorter than a multiple tube design, typically only 75% ofthe length of its tubo­annular equivalent. This results in a shorter, stiffer and lighter engine with a smaller frontal area and gives a more even distribution ofthe thermal loads on the turbine. 
The wall area is reduced, so the amount of cooling air required is also reduced. This permits more air to be used in the combustion process which improves combustion efficiency and results in cleaner emissions. 
The principal disadvantage of the annular combustor is that it is more difficult to manufacture and is not as strong as the tubo­annular design. 
Annular combustors may be lined with ceramic tiles to protect the flame tube from the high temperatures. Alternatively the flame tube itself may be constructed from a laminate of material which allows cooling air to enter a network of passages in its walls. Air entering the chamber provides a protective barrier between the hot combustion gases and the wall of the flame tube. 
All types of combustion chamber have drain valves to remove unburnt fuel. 

Combustor and Turbine Design 

Reverse Flow Annular Combustor  
To create a shorter engine, a reverse flow combustor can be used. Air enters from the rear of the engine, rather than the front. Air exiting the compressor is first ducted around the combustor and then fed in from rear to front. This allows the designer to place the compressor and turbine sections much closer together.  
Forcing the airflow to reverse results in some loss of efficiency but the advantages of a shorter engine make this a desirable option for helicopters and small turboprop aircraft.  
Centrifugal compressor  I Nozzle HP turbine guide vane  

Combustor and Turbine Design 
Fuel Spray Nozzles 
Fuel is introduced to the combustion chamber through fuel nozzles mounted around the circumference ofthe air casing. The function of the nozzles is to introduce a finely atomised spray of kerosene or kerosene vapour into the turbulent air in the primary zone of the flame tube. 
The two principal types are pressure jets and air spray injectors. 
ft.f:hf+lo 

Pressure Jet Injector 
The simplest type of pressure injector is the "simplex" nozzle. Fuel is delivered under high pressure through a swirl chamber and then out through the nozzle to provide a continuous stream of finely atomised fuel. Although it works well at high power settings the design is inefficient at low RPM. 
A refined version, the "duplex" nozzle, delivers fuel under pressure to two orifices. The smaller orifice supplies fuel at low RPM, the larger orifice supplies fuel at high power settings. 
Combustor and Turbine Design 
ft+M+lo 
Air Spray Injector 
The air spray injector channels air from the compressor through an inner swirl chamber and outer swirl vanes. An annular fuel nozzle sits between the two so that the fuel is ejected between two turbulent air streams. This creates a finely atomised spray which improves combustion, producing fewer carbon deposits and offering cleaner exhaust emissions. Spray injectors operate at lower fuel pressures than pressure jet injectors. 


Combustor and Turbine Design 
Fuel Vaporisers 
The most basic method of introducing fuel into the combustor is the fuel vaporiser. This very simple system comprises a U or T shaped tube. Fuel is forced through the tube to exit in the opposite direction to the air flowing into the flame tube. This produces reasonably good fuel atomisation. They are rarely used on commercial aircraft engines because of their relatively inefficient combustion characteristics. 


Which of these statements is UNTRUE? 
• The purpose of a combustion chamber or "combustor" is to mix fuel with the compressed air and burn it efficiently. 
• Combustion results in a sharp rise in gas pressure 
• The temperature of the gases leaving the combustion chamber are typically between 1000°C and 1500°C 
• Typically the combustion temperature may peak at 2100°c 
Combustor and Turbine Design 
Ignition Systems 
Gas turbine engines burn fuel continuously so a separate ignition source is usually required only during the start. Dual ignition systems are always fitted for redundancy. 
Traditionally ignition systems were powered by the aircraft electrical system, either AC or DC. Modern aircraft use an engine driven permanent magnet alternator (PMA) which also supplies the FAD EC. This serves to make the engine electrics independent of the aircraft electrics. 
There are two types ofAC igniter. The high-energy (25 000 V) type operates in a similar way to the spark plugs of a piston engine. It uses a capacitance High Energy Ignition Unit (HEIU) to store, and the deliver about 60-100 sparks per minute during the start sequence. 
The surface discharge igniter works in much the same way but uses an iridium electrode and silicon carbide semiconductor to create a high intensity flashover from the electrode to the body. It requires only 2000 V. 
Two igniters are normally mounted on the air casing and project into the flame tube. 
ftjfifii=f­

The ignition system can work automatically with the engine starting system or independently. During automatic operation ignition ceases when stable combustion has been achieved. 
To reduce the risk of flame-out some checklists require the igniters to be switched to "continuous ignition" during take-off from wet runways. Continuous ignition may also be required for flight through heavy rain, flight in high ambient temperatures, in the vicinity of volcanic ash and during the approach and landing. 
The ignition system can usually operate at two different energy outputs. The high power (12 joule) output is used for short periods of operation such as high altitude starts and ground starting. The low power (3-6 joule) output is used for continuous ignition. 
DC ignition systems use a "vibrator" or "tumbler" mechanism to feed pulsed DC to a step-up transformer. An alternative system uses a transistorised chopper circuit rather than a mechanical vibrator. 

PAGE 72 78 ~

Combustor and Turbine Design en • 
Turbines 

The turbine is the most highly stressed component in the engine. LP Turbine Not only does each blade endure large centrifugal forces, sometimes as much as 66 000 G, but it must also cope with gas temperatures up to 1600°C, which is well above their melting point. This mechanical-thermal stress affects turbine blades as well as the wheels or discs to which the blades are attached. In normal operation the blades glow red hot. 
The turbine provides power to drive the compressors, front fan, and a drive shaft for ancillary components. 
In turbo-propeller or turbo shaft engines the turbine also powers the propeller or helicopter rotor blades. Turbo-propeller and turbo­shaft engines extract almost all the energy from the exhaust gas. 
Combustor and Turbine Design 
Principle of Operation 
A turbine assembly comprises a series of stages. Each stage comprises a set affixed nozzle guide vanes (stator) and a rotating disc comprising many turbine blades. The discs are directly coupled to their respective compressor to create a spool. The entire assembly is located within a divergent duct to ensure that it doesn't create so much back pressure that it might choke the engine. 
High velocity gas leaves the combustion chamber and enters the Nozzle Guide Vanes (NGVs). The vanes direct the gas at the right speed and in the right direction onto the turbine blades. This generates a force on each turbine blade which causes the turbine disc to rotate. 

Types of Turbine 
There are three types of turbine: impulse, reaction and a combination of the two the impulse-reaction system. 
Impulse Turbine 
The nozzle guide vanes form convergent ducts which accelerate the gas and reduce its pressure. The accelerated gas then strikes the crescent shaped turbine blades causing an impulse force which drives the turbine. 
Reaction Turbine 
The nozzle guide vanes form parallel ducts to change the direction of airflow only. There is no change to pressure or temperature. However, some reaction turbines might form slightly convergent ducts, in which case the air is accelerated slightly with a corresponding slight drop in pressure and temperature. 
Combustor and Turbine Design 

Impulse-Reaction Turbine 
Normally gas turbine engines use a combination of impulse and reaction turbine blades to generate rotation. The nozzle guide 
Nozzle Turbine Nozzle Turbine Nozzle Turbine 
vanes form a convergent duct. The turbine blade is shaped to capture impulse force at its root and generate reaction force at its tip. About half the turning force comes from the impulse and half from the reaction. 
It is important to understand that turning force is not derived from the aerofoil shape of the blade, only from impulse and reaction. So, unlike the axial flow compressor, the axial flow turbine cannot stall. 


Impulse blade Reaction blade 
Turbine blades and NGVs are twisted along their length. The twist ensures that gas flows with uniform axial velocity along the entire span of the blade or vane. The amount oftwist is defined by its "stagger angle" and is greatest at the tip. 
The task of a turbine is to extract energy from the gas stream. So, not surprisingly, there is an overall drop in temperature, pressure and velocity across a turbine stage. 

Combustor and Turbine Design 
Turbine Blade Design and Construction 
The combination of heat and stress causes turbine rotor blades to steadily increase in length during their operating life. This phenomenon is known as "blade creep" and sets a finite life for the turbine. 
Most turbine blades are cast from high temperature nickel alloy which is resistant to creep. They are sometimes coated with a ceramic thermal barrier coating. 
The most exotic blades are formed from a single crystal of nickel alloy. Single crystal blades are even more resistant to blade creep but are very much more expensive to manufacture. 
Combustor and Turbine Design 
Turbine Blade Design and Construction continued 
The blades operate in temperatures which far exceed the melting point of the materials from which they are constructed. Consequently, sophisticated cooling mechanisms are required. There are three principal methods: 
¦ 
Convective Cooling. Large vented cooling voids are created inside the blade to promote heat transfer by convection. 

¦ 
Impingement Cooling. Jets of cooling air are played onto the internal surfaces of the blade faces. Heat is transferred to the air which then exhausts from holes in the trailing edge of the blade. 

¦ 
Film Cooling. Internal air passages are fed with high pressure cooling air. The air exits through very fine holes drilled into the faces ofthe blade and forms a protective film of cooling air across the surface. 


In this context "cooling" air is a somewhat relative term. The air is drawn from the HP compressor and is approximately 700°C! 
Turbine blade tips are usually shrouded to prevent tip losses and are normally attached to the turbine disc using a fir tree root. This diagram shows a blade without its tip shroud. 
Combustor and Turbine Design 
Turbine Disc Creep 
The turbine disc itself is also prone to creep. Turbine disc creep is partially controlled by introducing inter-stage cooling using relatively cool air from the compressor. 
Multi-Spool Engine Designs 
In multi-spool designs the higher speed HP turbine is closest to the combustion chamber to take advantage ofthe highest energy exhaust gas. It powers the HP compressor. The LP turbine is located furthest downstream and operates at slower speed. The LP turbine powers either the front fan or, in turbo-props, the propeller. On triple spool designs the middle IP turbine is used to power the middle IP compressor. 

Active Clearance Control 
Active clearance control is a method for controlling turbine blade tip clearance in the turbine section. Bleed air is played onto the turbine casing. By adjusting the flow of bleed air the internal circumference of the casing can be very finely controlled. 
Combustor and Turbine Design 
Fatigue 
High Cycle Fatigue (HCF) occurs where a large number of small stresses, typically more than 10 000, lead to a component failure. In the context of gas turbines high cycle fatigue is mainly caused by high frequency engine vibration and can lead not only to turbine blade failure but also to the failure of range of components including fans and compressors. 
Low Cycle Fatigue (LCF) is caused by a lower number of larger stresses. LCF damage occurs to turbine blades following changes in stress and tensile strain and by thermal stress when the turbine speed, and consequently the load on the turbine, is changed. Low cycle fatigue is reduced by operating at cooler temperatures and minimising turbine load changes. 
The probability of both HCF and LCF failures can be calculated. This means that components can be lifed and replaced before a failure is likely. Modern alloys and careful component design help to reduce the chance of both HCF and LCF failures. 
This image shows a computer model of thermal stress on the fir tree root of a turbine blade. 



Lesson 39 
Exhaust and Thrust Systems 

AGK 39 
Exhaust and Thrust Systems 
ftiihtrlo 
Exhaust Systems 
The function of the exhaust system is to straighten, accelerate and direct the exhaust gases to maximise thrust. A second important task is to produce minimum noise. The design of the exhaust system significantly affects overall performance. 
In a turbo-prop engine the main function of the exhaust is to expel low energy waste gas from the engine. 
The exhaust system comprises exhaust cone, jet pipe and propelling nozzle. 
Gas from the engine turbine enters the exhaust system at speeds approaching 370 m/sec. If this velocity were maintained a lot of energy would be lost in friction between the gas and the inner surface of the exhaust pipe. 
For this reason a tail cone is attached to the rear of the turbine section. This creates a divergent duct which exchanges velocity for pressure. It also helps to prevent hot gas from flowing across the rear face of the rearmost turbine. The rear struts holding the tail cone also help to reduce any residual whirl in the gas stream. 

Exhaust and Thrust Systems 
Exhaust Systems continued 
Exhaust gas velocity is held at about 290 m/sec (Mach 0.5 relative to the exhaust system) until it reaches the propelling nozzle. 
The nozzle forms a convergent duct that converts pressure back to velocity. The gas stream in the propelling nozzle can accelerate to about Mach 1.0, beyond which no further increase in velocity can be obtained unless the temperature is increased. At this point the nozzle is "choked" and back-pressure builds up in the exhaust. 
The difference between the increased static pressure in the exhaust section and the air beyond, which is of course at atmospheric pressure, results in "pressure thrust" which adds to the thrust obtained from the momentum of the gas. 
Some designs maximise the pressure thrust by adding a divergent section after the throat. This is known as a convergent-divergent nozzle. 


ft+i.+l o 
nozzle 
Exhaust and Thrust Systems 
ftiihtrlo 
Low Bypass Engines 

High Bypass Engines 
Bypass engines have two gas streams to eject to atmosphere. In 

In high bypass engines the two streams are usually exhausted 
low or medium bypass engines the two streams are normally 

through separate co-axial nozzles. 

Exhaust and Thrust Systems 
Noise Suppression 
Noise suppression is a high priority. Exhaust noise is caused by the violent turbulence and rapid shearing action associated with high speed gases exiting from the exhaust section. 
On medium bypass engines "mixer chutes" combine the high and low speed gases to produce a slower speed, quieter exhaust. On high bypass engines the bypass air is ejected around the high velocity core air, effectively sheathing it. 
Turbo jet engines are retrofitted with exhaust hush kits which extend the jet pipe. 
Exhaust and Thrust Systems 
ftiifftrlO 
The Danger from Jet Efflux 
The high mass flows produced by modern jet engines represent a serious safety hazard to ground personnel. The hazard area extends several tens of metres behind the engine -even at idle RPM. 
Exhaust efflux can also damage other aircraft or blow equipment across the servicing area. Extreme care must be taken not to approach the rear of a running engine. Pilots must exercise similar caution when applying thrust -particularly in congested areas. Problems most commonly occur when using higher than usual thrust settings to start moving or when initiating a tight turn. 
Exhaust and Thrust Systems 
Thrust Reversers 
Exhaust efflux is often used for one other important task ­providing reverse thrust on the ground. 
Thrust reversal is used on landing and for rejected take-offs to reduce the load on the wheel braking system and to reduce the length of the landing run. It is especially useful on wet or icy runways when the conventional braking action is reduced. Typically the maximum reverse thrust available is only about 45% of maximum forward thrust. 
Thrust reverse systems must be carefully designed to ensure that hot gas is not re-ingested by the engine (which might cause a surge) and that it doesn't damage the wing. 
In all thrust reversal systems part of the exhaust stream is reversed to create a retarding force. The hot turbine exhaust can be reversed by up to 130° to produce a strong retarding force. The cold stream can also be reversed, but through a smaller angle. Consequently cold stream reversal is not quite as effective. On high bypass engines normally only the cold stream is reversed. The three most common mechanisms are shown here. 
ft+M+lo 


Exhaust and Thrust Systems 
ftiH+lo 
Clamshell and Bucket Systems 
Clamshell doors and buckets produce reverse thrust by redirecting the core (turbine) exhaust air. Clamshell doors are normally operated by pneumatic actuators. Buckets are normally hydraulically operated. 


Exhaust and Thrust Systems 
fti+h+lo 
Cold Stream Reversal Systems 
Cold stream reversal produces reverse thrust by blocking and then redirecting the bypass air. Air driven screw-jacks extend blocker doors which seal off the bypass duct. They also drive back the rear section of the nacelle to allow the bypass air to exhaust through cascade vanes which direct the air forwards. 


Exhaust and Thrust Systems 
ft+M+lo 
Interlock Protection 
Inadvertent operation of reverse thrust in flight can and has caused catastrophic structural failures. Consequently these systems must be extensively protected by interlocks. There are normally three separate locks. One is operated from the flight deck, and the other two are operated and controlled by the engine. Amber caution lights on the flight deck indicate when the reverser doors are unlocked. 
The system is prevented from deploying until the aircraft is on the ground and the engine is at idle RPM. Full reverse thrust cannot be selected until the thrust reverser mechanism has fully travelled. 
Limitations on Use 
On some engines reverse thrust cannot be used at very low speeds because hot exhaust gases might be re-ingested into the engine. 


Exhaust and Thrust Systems 
Boeing System Operation 
On Boeing aircraft separate thrust reverse levers are mounted on the forward edge of the thrust levers. They are mechanically interlocked to prevent them being used until the main power levers are at idle. Whilst the thrust levers are fully retarded and the aircraft is on the ground the reverse thrust levers can be pulled up to activate the thrust reverse system and to control engine 
RPM. 
Reverse thrust levers 
Exhaust and Thrust Systems 
Airbus System Operation 
On Airbus aircraft the main thrust levers are used to select and control reverse thrust. Reverse thrust is activated and controlled by moving the levers back, through a 'gate' beyond the idle position. The reverse thrust range is protected by interlocks including a weight on wheels sensor. 
The thrust reversal system is either manually cancelled or cancelled automatically when the aircraft slows below a certain speed. 
Reverse thrust range 
Exhaust and Thrust Systems 
Exhaust Temperature Measurement 
Temperature measurement is an essential task in the gas turbine engine. The internal temperatures of the engine have a significant impact on the operating life and structural integrity of the turbine section. 
Excessive temperatures will shorten the life of the engine. They can also result in catastrophic failure ofthe turbine discs. Therefore any temperature exceedance, whether intentional or otherwise, must be recorded in the maintenance log. 
As the engine accelerates the EGT will increase with increased air mass flow and will decrease during deceleration. These temperature variations impose significant thermal stress on the turbine. Short haul aircraft, which perform many cycles every day, impose the most thermal stress on the engine. This high "fatigue cycle" means that the engines on short haul aircraft will require more frequent inspection. 
Temperature sensors are located at several points in the exhaust and turbine areas. 
The most common sensor is the thermocouple. Thermocouples convert heat into electrical current. Two wires of dissimilar metal, typically chromel and alumel, are joined at a "hot" and "cold" junction to form a loop. A small voltage is produced whenever a temperature difference exists between the two junctions. 



Cold junction in the Cockpit 
Current Flow 

The voltage is translated to a visual indication of temperature. 
Thermocouples are wired in parallel so that the failure of one does not cause a total failure of the temperature monitoring system. 


Lesson 40 
Gas Turbine Systems 

AGK40 
Gas Turbine Systems 
Auxiliary Gearboxes 
As well as producing thrust, gas turbine engines are also the principal source of power for all other aircraft systems. Auxiliary or "accessory" gearboxes typically provide power to drive the aircraft's hydraulic, electrical and pneumatic systems. 
Power is also provided to drive the engine's fuel and oil systems. The gearbox is usually mounted on the underside of the engine for easier maintenance. 
The power extracted is not insignificant. On a high bypass engine it can be as much as 370 kilowatts. 
The gearbox is powered by an accessory drive shaft which takes power from one of the compressor shafts. The drive may be transmitted through one or more internal gearboxes. 
The starter motor is usually mounted on the auxiliary gearbox and drives the engine through the accessory drive shaft. On a multi spool engine, this drive must be connected to the HP spool. 
ft+IPflo 
Internal gearbox 
Drive shaft 
IntermediateExternal 
gearboxgearbox 


Non-essential components (but not the fuel or oil pumps) are usually connected to the gearbox via a quill shaft or "shear neck". This type of shaft incorporates a deliberate weak point which shears if the component seizes thus protecting the gearbox and drive system from excessively high loads. 

Gas Turbine Systems 
Oil Systems 
The main purpose of the lubrication system is to reduce friction and wear between the moving components of the engine. The most significant moving components are the ball and roller main bearings of the main drive shafts. Lubricating oil is also fed to the external drive gearboxes. 
Most gas turbine oil systems are self-contained and have their own oil reservoir, usually mounted on the fan or compressor casing. Oil is pumped around the system by engine driven pumps. Oil is then gathered by scavenge pumps and returned through filters and coolers to the oil reservoir to be used again. 
A typical Rolls Royce design is shown here. 

ft++·•o 
Fuel-cooled oil cooler Air-cooled oil cooler 
~ -_-•~ e trans~itter and low ff' pressure warning switch De-aerator tray 

¦ Feed oil Pressure ~ 
¦ Return oil filter 
¦ Vent air 
}~ 
Relief valv Oil differential From oil tank 
pressure switch 
Gas Turbine Systems 
ft+it•o 


The Main Components of an Oil System 

Pressure This diagram shows a typical oil system layout. The main points Differential relief De-aerator plate pressure valve Oil tank 
to note are: 
¦ A spur gear type pump draws oil from the reservoir through a coarse filter. 
• 
The oil is then fed though a fine filter. The filter will have a bypass system, so that the engine will still be supplied with oil in the event offilter blockage. In this situation, using unfiltered oil could damage the engine, but preferable to no lubrication at all. 

• 
Oil is then pumped to individual bearings and sprayed through oil jets onto the main bearings and gearbox rotating parts. 


¦ The main bearings are housed in pressurised oil chambers which serve to trap and collect the used oil from a sump at the bottom of the housing. 
¦ Magnetic chip detectors in the return lines collect metallic ¦ Larger capacity scavenge pumps collect the oil and return it, debris from the bearing chambers. They provide early via a ram air oil cooling system, to the tank. The tank is warning of failure and are designed to be removed easily vented to atmosphere to prevent pressure build up. 
during maintenance inspections. 
¦ 
Fuel-Cooled Oil Coolers (FCOC) cool the oil and heat the fuel to prevent icing. 

¦ 
Oil temperature is measured on the return to the tank. 

¦ 
Pressure relief valves are used to protect filters and cooling elements. 


Gas Turbine Systems 

Main Bearing Housings Oil
The main bearings run at very high temperatures and as a result 
feeds 
their housings and the oil inside them become very hot. Ordinary rubber or nylon housing seals are inadequate so an alternative 
High
sealing method must be used. Labyrinth seals use high pressure 
pressure
air and a groove and thread system to block any oil which tries to 
air 
escape across the seal. 
High pressure bleed air is fed to the labyrinth seal which prevents oil in the housing from leaking out across the grooved seals. This method of sealing allows some movement between static and rotating assemblies. 
Bearing housing pressure is controlled by venting the housing. 

Each spool in the engine is supported by at least one ball bearing Scavenge return line
housing and two or more roller bearings, as shown the image opposite. 
This type of air sealing system results in aerated oil which needs to be conditioned before it can be reused. Air is separated from the oil using a centrifugal breather. The relatively heavy oil is thrown to the sides and gathered whilst the air is vented overboard. 
Gas Turbine Systems 
Types of Gas Turbine Oil System 
There are two main types of lubrication system: the pressure relief valve system and the full flow system. 
In the pressure relief valve system a powerful pump provides oil pressure to the bearing chambers. The pressure is controlled by a pressure relief valve. The system works well when bearing chamber pressure is relatively low and does not increase much with engine RPM. But it is unsuitable for the high bearing chamber pressures found in modern engines. 
In the more common full flow oil system, oil flow and bearing housing pressures are directly proportional to engine speed, this permits higher bearing pressures and ensures an optimum flow of oil to the bearings at all engine speeds. 

Gas Turbine Engine Oils 
Gas turbine engines have high speed rotating assemblies but no reciprocating parts. Internal temperatures and pressures are very high, but ambient temperatures at high altitudes are very low. It is not uncommon for engine oil to experience a temperature range from -40°C to 250°C in one flight. To address these conflicting requirements low viscosity (thin) synthetic oils are used. 
Low viscosity oil offers very little resistance to the rotation of the main shafts and helps to reduce the workload on the starter motor. 
Oil System Monitoring 
Engine oil temperature, pressure and quantity are monitored and are usually displayed in the cockpit. 
The pressure drop across the HP filter and scavenge oil filter are also monitored. An excessive drop could indicate debris in the system and an impending engine failure. 
Gas Turbine Systems 
Engine Bleed Air Systems 
Air is taken from several compressor stages to be used for various internal engine tasks and externally to supply hot or high pressure air to aircraft systems. Air tapped from the compressor is known as "bleed air". 
Bleed air is not without its disadvantages. Tapping air from the compressor reduces the mass flow though the engine. This increases the engine's operating temperature and reduces power output or thrust. It also increases specific fuel consumption. So when bleed air is selected the pilot may notice a reduction in thrust (EPR) or N1, combined with an increase in EGT and fuel flow. 
Because of their effect on performance, some external bleed air systems must not be used during critical flight phases such as take-off, approach and landing. Future engine designs may do away with bleed air altogether opting instead for more powerful generators to supply an "all-electric" aircraft. 


Internal Air Systems 
The main functions of the internal air system are: 
• 
Internal engine and accessory cooling. 

• 
Bearing chamber sealing. 

• 
Prevention of hot gas ingestion into turbine disc cavities. 

• 
Engine anti-icing. 



Generally, bleed air is taken from an appropriate compressor stage depending on the required task. Relatively hot HP air is used to cool the turbine nozzle guide vanes, the turbine blades and the turbine discs. LP air is used to cool the accessories. Air of differing pressures and temperatures is used to seal the bearing chambers and to control the flow of cooling air around the turbine. 
The internal air temperature is monitored by sensors in the engine. Excessively hot air will trigger an overheat warning caption. 
Engine anti-icing uses HP air. The hot air is fed to internal galleries in the intake lip and through the supporting struts of the front compressor bearing. 
Gas Turbine Systems 
Engine Fuel Systems 

The purpose of an engine fuel system is to provide the correct quantity of fuel at the correct pressure under all conditions of altitude, airspeed, air temperature, engine temperature, engine speed and power setting. Apart from the thrust levers, the fuel control system is fully automatic. 
The main components of an engine fuel system are the HP fuel pump, a Fuel Control Unit (FCU) and a high pressure shut off valve, or "pressure raising shut-off valve." All of these components are usually mounted on the engine. 
An electrically driven LP booster pump ensures a positive fuel feed to the HP pump at all times. 


Gas Turbine Systems 
High Pressure Fuel Pumps 
Two types of high pressure fuel pump are used on gas turbines engines. These are: 
¦ 
Spur gear fixed volume pumps. 

¦ 
Multi-plunger (multi-piston) variable volume pumps. 


Spur gear pumps are used for low pressure air-spray fuel burners. They are light and simple in operation. To allow for acceleration the pump delivers more fuel to the fuel control unit than is required. A relief valve returns excess fuel to the inlet side of the pump. 
The multi-plunger pump incorporates a swash plate. The stroke of the pump is limited by the angle of the swash plate, which in turn is adjusted by a control piston. The extension of the control piston is determined by inputs from the engine overspeed governor and the FCU. By moving the swash plate the stroke can be adjusted which in turn adjusts the pump output. At engine start the pump defaults to full stroke. 
Both types of pump use fuel to lubricate their moving parts. To avoid them overheating, the engine is shut down using the HP shut-off valve. This technique also avoids the risk of cavitation in the LP fuel lines. 

A pressurising and dump valve is fitted before the burner nozzles. On start up, this valve will allow fuel to the burners once the pressure is high enough for sufficient atomisation. On shut down it will close and dump the fuel in the line to low pressure, or return it to the aircraft fuel tanks. We have a 3D model of a fuel pump for you to view in more detail on the next page. 
Gas Turbine Systems 
Fuel Control Units (FCU) 
The purpose of a FCU is to ensure the correct ratio of fuel and air during all phases ofengine operation. In other words it must keep the engine on the working line and away from the stability line during acceleration. Each engine has a dedicated FCU. 
When the pilot demands more thrust the input from the lever is sensed by the engine speed governor in the FCU. The governor now demands more fuel to accelerate the engine and the FCU commands the control piston in the HP fuel pump to move. 
More fuel is delivered to the fuel spray nozzles so combustion temperature increases. This causes the gases to exit the combustor faster which increases engine speed. The result is greater mass flow through the engine and consequently greater thrust. 
An FCU moderates the fuel flow to the spray nozzles in all flight conditions. The amount offuel required for a given thrust setting will vary according to the mass of air entering the combustor. 

An FCU has inputs from: 
¦ 
The thrust lever position or angle. 

¦ 
Air inlet temperature and pressure. 

¦ 
Engine speed. 

¦ 
Exhaust gas temperature. 

¦ 
Compressor discharge pressure. 



An Acceleration Control Unit (ACU) limits fuel flow to prevent over fuelling when the thrust lever is advanced. 
An altitude sensing unit or "barometric pressure control unit", compensates for changes in intake pressure caused by airspeed or variations in ambient air pressure. 
The FCU automatically adjusts fuel flow the keep the engine within its RPM and temperature limits. 
There are several different types of fuel control unit with names reflecting their design methodology. These include the Power Management System (PMS), the Mechanical Engine Control Unit (MECU or MEC) and the Power Management Control System (PMCS). Their internal mechanisms are very complex but you will not be asked detailed questions about them. 
Gas Turbine Systems 
FADEC 
The old style hydromechanical FCU has now been mostly superseded by Full Authority Digital Engine Control (FADEC) units. FAD EC is the term used for the total system, including EEC, FMU, sensors, actuators and electrical wiring. FADEC units are duplicated and have at least two channels of communication for redundancy and have their own power supply. 
In a FADEC system the FCU is replaced by an Electronic Engine Controller (EEC) and a Fuel Metering Unit (FMU). 
The EEC is a digital computer which senses a wide variety of engine and aircraft parameters and sends control commands to the FMU. 
The input from the throttle is not a mechanical linkage. The throttle lever angle is converted to electrical signals in the throttle control unit, and then transmitted to the EEC. 
All input and output data is checked by both channels. 
The FMU regulates HP pump output pressure to deliver the correct amount of fuel to the engine. The EEC also sends control commands to the engine airflow control systems to prevent compressor stall and surge and to improve efficiency. FAD EC systems are single fault tolerant, where a single input data failure will not affect the normal operation of the engine. 
ft+iiif¦o 

The major functions a FADEC system are: 
¦ 
Automatic starting 

¦ 
Idle. 

¦ 
Acceleration and deceleration scheduling. 

¦ 
Fuel flow control for automatic thrust setting computations. 

¦ 
Fuel flow control for manual power settings. 

¦ 
To maintain sufficient HP pump output at low RPM to power the FMU's internal components. 

¦ 
Fuel shut-off when commanded by the pilot or the EEC. 

¦ 
Overspeed protection. 

¦ 
Overtemp protection. 

¦ 
Controlling compressor airflow using IGV's, VSV's and Bleed Valves. 

¦ 
Ensuring manifold fuel draining on shut-down and returning excess fuel to the tanks. 

¦ 
Active clearance control of the turbine. 


Gas Turbine Systems 
Progression from hydro-mechanical to dual FADEC 
As you might imagine the transit from the old, purely hydro­mechanical FCU described earlier to the modern FADEC was not one giant leap but a steady progression. The following list is given as a guide. 
¦ 
Hydro-mechanical -this was the first generation of fuel control systems used on the early jets. 

¦ 
Hydro-mechanical with a limited authority electronic supervisor. This was still a hydro-mechanical system but with electronic refinement which either reacted more quickly or made life easier for the pilot. The electronic refinement could be switched off and was not required for dispatch. 

¦ 
Single channel FAD EC with mechanical back up. Full engine control added to the refinements of the previous generation but still with the ability to revert to mechanical systems. It seems the ability of mechanical back up varies between aircraft with some the mechanical back up is limited and designed to get you to land as soon as practicable, while on others you can carry on. There is no dispatch with a failed FADEC. 


¦ Dual channel FADEC with no mechanical back up. This is the latest, the FADE Cs are in constant communication with one another, if one fails the other takes over with full function for the remainder of the flight. There is no dispatch with a failed FADEC. 
Gas Turbine Systems 
Fuel Oil Heat Exchangers 
Fuel Oil Heat Exchangers ("FOHE"), sometimes known as Fuel Cooled Oil Coolers ("FCOC"), use heat from the oil to warm the fuel. This has two beneficial effects. Hot oil is cooled before it returns to the engine and cold fuel is warmed before it reaches the HP fuel system. The oil in a FOHE is usually at higher pressure than the fuel. This helps to ensure that fuel does not enter the oil system in the event of an internal leak in the FOHE. Oil entering the fuel from a leak in the FOHE would cause oil to be burnt in the combustion chamber. Apart from the depletion of the oil the burnt oil could cause carbon deposits and uneven burning. 
Fuel warming is important because it reduces the risk of fuel waxing. For this reason a FOHE is usually located upstream from the HP fuel pump to guarantee that wax crystals do not clog the inlet to the pump. 
In some systems however, the fuel is heated by bleed air before the filters, and again by the FOHE after the fuel HP pump. The fuel in the FOHE will now be at a higher pressure than the oil, and an internal leak will result in fuel entering the oil system, giving a rise in the level in the oil tank. A more dangerous consequence of fuel in the oil system is that fuel will be admitted to areas of the engine intended to be free from fuel, with an increased risk of an engine fire. 


Types of Jet Fuel 
Jet fuel is a form of kerosene or paraffin oil. It may sometimes be referred to as jet kerosene orAVTUR, which stands for aviation turbine fuel. Jet kerosene has a specific gravity between 0.77 and 0.84. 
The most common jet kerosene specifications are Jet A and Jet A1. JetA is used in the United States while most of the rest of the world uses JetA1. 
Both JetA 1 and Jet A have a fairly high flash point of not less than 38° C. 
JetA and JetA1 may contain additives to inhibit oxidization and corrosion. Some may also contain anti-static agents. One of the most common additives is Fuel System Icing Inhibitor (FSII). 
A third type offuel, Jet B, is still occasionally used in Alaska and Canada, primarily because of its much better cold weather performance. This "wide-cut" fuel is much lighter, spanning the gasoline and kerosene boiling ranges. Because of its higher volatility it is more dangerous and is only exceptionally used for commercial operations. 
Gas Turbine Systems 
Fuel Waxing 
Jet A 1 has a lower maximum freezing point than Jet A. The freezing point of Jet A is -40°C, the freezing point of Jet A 1 is ­47°C. JetA1 'slower freezing point makes it more suitable for long international flights, especially on polar routes during the winter. Jet B freezes at -60°C. 
When it becomes very cold, jet kerosene will form waxy deposits, a phenomenon known as "waxing". Waxing is potentially dangerous because it can lead to clogged filters and pipes. 
Jet fuel does not become solid at one temperature. It contains many hydrocarbons each with their own freezing point. As the fuel cools, the elements with the highest freezing points solidify first, forming wax crystals. The remaining elements will form wax crystal as the fuel continues to cool. Consequently jet kerosene gradually changes from containing a few wax crystals, to a slush and then finally to near-solid wax. 
The freezing point ofjet kerosene is defined as the temperature at which the last wax crystal melts, when warming a fuel that has previously been cooled until wax crystals form. Thus the freezing point of fuel is well above the temperature at which it solidifies. 
Waxing is potentially dangerous because it can lead to clogged filters and pipes 



Lesson 47 
Gas Turbine Handling 

AGK47 
Gas Turbine Handling 
ft.ihbf o 
Engine Starting 
To start a gas turbine engine three conditions must be met: 
¦ 
There must be a flow of compressed air through the engine. 

¦ 
Fuel must be supplied to the combustor. 

¦ 
There must be a source of ignition. 


The exact ground start sequence will vary from type to type but will essentially follow the same steps. The sequence is mostly automatic and is initiated by selecting a start switch on for two to three seconds. 
This activates a starter motor which, on a multi-spool engine, turns the HP compressor. Shortly after rotation begins the ignition units are energised at their high power setting. At about 15% RPM the HP shut-off valve is opened, allowing fuel to enter the combustor. 

The HP shut-off valve is rarely called by its technical name. It is Light-up occurs shortly after the shut-off valve is opened, more usual to refer to it by the name of its control. 

indicated by a rise in EGT. 
On some aircraft the HP shut-off valve may be incorporated in the thrust lever and is opened by moving the lever past a latched or "gated" position. 
Gas Turbine Handling 
Engine Starting continued 
The starter motor continues to help the engine to accelerate until it reaches self sustaining speed (about 30% RPM). This is the point where the engine is generating sufficient excess power to accelerate itself to idle RPM without assistance from the starter motor. 
The igniters and starter-motor cancel automatically shortly after self-sustaining speed is reached. 
The engine will continue to accelerate under its own power until it reaches and stabilises at ground idle speed. At this point N2 will be about 60% RPM and the LP compressor (N1) will be at about 25% RPM. The start sequence is complete. 
The start sequence controller usually incorporates a time switch and an overspeed sensor. 
It is quite common to hear a low frequency resonance from the exhaust during start. This is normal and no remedial action is required. 
ft+i.bl o 
Peak starting TGT Idle RPM 60 90 
50 
\ \ 
Self-sustain~ 

70
40
::1!: 
Idle TGT 1-­
(.!)
a.. 
1-­
a::: 
>< >< 
co 30 co ::1!: ::1!: 
~ 00 20 50 ~ 
HP Fuel on 
10 
~itionon Start 
30
selected 5 10 15 20 25 30 Seconds 
Gas Turbine Handling 
ft.lhbl o 
Types of Starter Motor 
Two types of starter system are commonly used: 
¦ 
Electric. An electric DC starter motor drives the engine through a reduction gearbox. Power is normally transmitted to the HP compressor shaft through the radial drive shaft. 

¦ 
Pneumatic. As its name suggests, a pneumatic starter motor is driven by air. Compressed air is directed onto a turbine in the starter motor. The motor turns the HP compressor via the drive shaft. In this system the starter motor can use air ducted from a running engine or from the Auxiliary Power Unit (APU) or from an external air source. Most commercial aircraft have a pneumatic back-up start system. 



Gas Turbine Handling 
Engine Start Malfunctions 
There are a number of possible start sequence failures, the most common of which are: 
Nil Rotation. The compressor fails to turn. This can be caused by a sheared starter drive, no air to the starter, or no current to the starter. 
On multi-spool engines, the low pressure (N1) spool is not connected to the starter motor. A tailwind can cause the N1 rotor to rotate in a reverse direction. During an engine start with the low pressure rotor windmilling in a reverse direction, the rotor will decelerate, stop, and then start rotating in the normal direction. Under these conditions the start will be slower than normal, with a higher than normal EGT as the tailwind velocity increases. Under high tail wind conditions it may not be possible to start the engine, in which case the engine must be turned into wind prior to start. 
Dry Start. Fuel fails to flow to the engine. Light-up does not occur (no EGT rise) and the engine stagnates at low RPM, driven only by the starter motor. The start must be cancelled. The indications of a dry start are: 
¦ 
Low and stagnating RPM. 

¦ 
No EGT rise. 

¦ 
No fuel flow. 




Hung Start. If the engine lights up but fails to accelerate properly the starter motor will continue to turn the engine but, without assistance from the engine itself, the start will "hang" with the engine RPM stagnating at typically less than 20%. The start sequence must be cancelled. The indications of a hung start are: 
¦ 
Low and stagnating RPM. 

¦ 
Low fuel flow. 

¦ 
High EGT. 



A hung start may often be the result of low air pressure or voltage to the starter motor. Similar indications can be caused by a compressor stall or surge during the start cycle. 
Hot Start. Occasionally light-up is followed by a very rapid rise in EGT. This is known as a hot start. It is essential that you monitor the EGT during the start sequence and abort the start as soon as it is obvious that EGT will exceed its maximum limit. A hot start is usually caused by excess fuel in the combustor, sometimes as a result of a previous failed start attempt. The symptoms of a hot start are: 
¦ An excessively quick rise in EGT. 
Gas Turbine Handling 
ft.iffbl o 
Engine Start Malfunctions continued 
Wet Start. If the engine fails to light-up, RPM will stabilise at a low value while unburned fuel is sprayed into the combustion chambers. This is known as a wet start. The start sequence must be cancelled. The symptoms of a wet start are: 
¦ 
Low and stable RPM. 

¦ 
No EGT rise. 

¦ 
Some indicated fuel flow. 


If a wet start occurs the pilot must carry out a "dry run" or "blow out" before attempting a re-start. 

To dry run the engine, the HP shut-off valve is closed and the igniters are switched off. The engine is then run using the start switch. This rotates the engine sufficiently fast to blow out any fuel that may have pooled in the combustor. 
If a dry run is not carried out after a wet start, the passengers will be treated to a phenomenon known as torching when the excess fuel ignites causing spectacular flames to exit from the exhaust section! 
Gas Turbine Handling 
Airborne Relight 
An airborne re-light requires the same three conditions as a normal ground start: air flow, fuel flow and a source of ignition. 
The forward speed ofthe aircraft is usually sufficient to windmill the compressor at a high enough RPM to begin the start sequence. Re-light can usually be achieved simply by activating the igniters and ensuring that the HP shut-off valve is open. 
An airborne re-light will only be successful if there is sufficient air mass flow through the engine. This depends on airspeed and altitude. It may first be necessary to descend (usually below 25 000 ft) and slow down to ensure that the start is carried under optimum conditions. In other words, within the "re-light envelope". 
The maximum re-light altitude is usually defined as the altitude at or below which a satisfactory re-light may be obtained within a given speed range. 
ft+M+lo 

Engine Shutdown 
The engine should be allowed to run at ground idle for a period of time, to decrease the thermal shock. If this is not carried out, problems can occur with the rotating assemblies due to differing cooling rates within the engine. 
Gas Turbine Handling 
Gas Turbine Operation and Monitoring 
Before we describe the various indicators used to monitor engine performance and health we first need to look at the common notation used to describe the various parts of the engine. 
Numbering starts from zero at the front ofthe engine. Lettering denotes the parameter being monitored: P for pressure, T for temperature and N for rotational speed. The typical notation for a twin spool engine would be: 
¦ 
PO, TO: ambient pressure and temperature. 

¦ 
P1, T1: compressor inlet. 

¦ 
P2, T2: LP compressor delivery 

¦ 
P3, T3: HP compressor delivery ¦ P4, T4: Turbine entry. 

¦ 
PS, TS: HP turbine exit outlet. 

¦ 
PG, TG: LP turbine outlet. ¦ P7, T7: exhaust. 

¦ 
N1 : speed of the fan or LP spool. 

¦ 
N2: speed of the HP spool. 


ft.Hft o 


On a triple spool engine N2 describes the IP spool and N3 the HP spool. On more sophisticated engine installations many of these values are recorded and digitally stored for trend analysis. Trend analysis looks for undesirable trends in engine operation which could indicate a developing problem, and also to enhance maintenance planning. 
Gas Turbine Handling 
ft.i=h%l o 


Thrust Indications 
Engine thrust is indicated either by reference to N1 or by Engine Pressure Ratio (EPR). EPR is the ratio ofjet pipe pressure to inlet pressure. A fan engine usually displays integrated EPR which is the ratio of turbine discharge and fan outlet pressures to compressor inlet pressure. 
The amount of thrust produced for a given EPR value will reduce with altitude. However, given the same atmospheric conditions EPR will equate to the same level of thrust irrespective ofthe engine's condition or age. EPR is often used as a means of indicating the power set. In ground icing conditions EPR may over-read if the P1 sensor becomes blocked. This has been the cause of at least one fatal take-off accident. 

Thrust Values Compressor Inlet Pressure 
Various thrust limits are normally specified: 
¦ Max Climb: used for a routine all-engines climb. 
¦ 
Max Take-Off: this is the maximum thrust allowed. Its use is usually limited by time. 

¦ 
Max Continuous: the maximum thrust that can be used continuously. 

¦ 
Go-around: a thrust value close to, but less than, maximum thrust used for the go-around. 


Gas Turbine Handling 
Handling Considerations 
Gas turbine engines are most efficient when operating at high RPM and at constant thrust settings. 
Frequent changes in thrust (and hence operating temperature) increase engine wear and low cycle fatigue. The turbine is the component most sensitive to high temperature. To preserve engine life, when ambient conditions and payload permit, a reduced, "de-rated" thrust take-off procedure is often used. The disadvantage oftaking off with de-rated thrust is reduced performance. In other words there is a longer take-off roll and a slower climb to height than if full thrust is used. 
FAD EC equipped aircraft enjoy a higher degree of envelope protection than engines equipped with a conventional hydro­mechanical FCU. This normally includes protection from exceeding EGT. Engines without FADEC must be handled more carefully and their operating parameters must be more closely monitored during all flight phases. The same applies for an engine whose FADEC system has failed. Not all engines 'spool­up' at the same rate, with some exhibiting a delay between pilot application of throttle and developing the required thrust. 
ft+Mi._o 

Engine Speed 
Engine speed is usually measured as a percentage of maximum RPM. On multi-spool engines N1 can be used to indicate engine thrust. The actual thrust delivered for a given N1 value will, of course, reduce with altitude. Changes in temperature and humidity will also affect the relationship between thrust and engine speed. 
During flight the lowest speed the engine operates at is Flight Idle. Flight Idle is faster than Ground Idle which means that the engine will be quicker to accelerate. It will also be able to sustain greater quantities of bleed off-take before reaching its limiting temperature. 
Gas Turbine Handling 
Engine Temperature 
The temperature ofthe exhaust gases is a reliable indicator of the performance and health ofthe engine. EGT is often used operationally to adjust thrust settings and may indeed be the limiting factor in high ambient temperatures. 
Temperature may be measured at a variety of different positions but ultimately all relate back to turbine temperature. There are several different measurements in common use: 
TGT  Turbine gas temperature  
EGT  Exhaust gas temperature  
TIT/ITT  Turbine inlet temperature  
TET  Turbine entry temperature  
JPT  Jet pipe temperature  
T4/T6  Temperature at stage 4/6 in the engine  


Torque 
On a turboprop engine power output is usually measured in terms ofthe torque produced at the propeller. Torque is a turning force, usually indicated as inch pounds or as a percentage of total power. 
Torque is measured either by hydraulic or electronic sensors, usually at the reduction gearbox. Some systems use electronic strain gauge sensors. 
Vibration 
A jet engine has no reciprocating components, so its levels of vibration are usually very low. Consequently, raised vibration levels can indicate impending problems. High frequency vibration in particular can indicate serious damage. Vibration indicators display levels of vibration on a scale of relative amplitude. The signal is filtered to remove unwanted frequencies and amplified before being transmitted to the vibration indicator. 
Engine Overheat Indication 
Engine overheat sensors are positioned around the engine and in the outlets of the vents to atmosphere. Excessively hot internal air indicates a serious engine malfunction which is why engine overheat captions are usually coloured red. 
Gas Turbine Handling 
Interpreting Engine Indications 
Monitoring of engine health indications is clearly desirable. However you should be alert for possible unusual combinations of indications, and as to what the causes might be. It may be possible to identify and assess engine damage based on instrument indications alone. 
The range of possibilities is too large for any meaningful analysis here, suffice to say that there have been many examples offlight crew misinterpreting indications that should have been obvious ­though it is always easy to be wise after the event. Wrong engines have been shut down in flight, with catastrophic consequences. 
ft.iiiifrlo 

Engine seizure 
Engine seizure describes a situation where one or more ofthe engine rotors stop turning in flight. Seizure results from very severe engine damage, to the point where the vanes and blades ofthe compressor and turbine are mostly destroyed. The static and rotating parts lock up against each other, bringing the rotor to a halt. The most likely cause of seizure is the ingestion offoreign objects. Other causes may be a failure of the lubrication system leading to bearing failure which eventually break up. Depending on the nature of cause, the seizure may be a gradual or rapid event. The rapid event can be startling, in April 1985 ice broke off the fuselage of an American Airlines B727 and went into the engine resulting in a rapid seizure that was sufficient to rip the engine off its mounting. The aircraft landed safely. 
Symptoms of engine seizure in flight may include vibration, zero rotor speed, yaw, unusual noises and the failure of other systems driven by that engine. 
As most seizures result from ingestion of foreign objects, such events can be reduced by good housekeeping procedures and good maintenance. In the above incident, the ice was caused by a leak in another system. 
Gas Turbine Hand ling 
Auxiliary Power Units (APU) 
The high power-to-weight ratio of gas turbine engines make them ideally suited for use as APUs. 
An APU generates pressurised air and electrical power to allow an aircraft to operate independently of ground support equipment. It can also provide back-up power in the event of in-flight engine failure. When ambient conditions dictate that the main engine bleeds are switched off, it can also provide air for cabin pressurisation and conditioning. An APU is often a critical element of the certification for extended twin engine operations, ETOPS. 
An APU draws fuel from the aircraft's main fuel supply, usually through a DC powered booster pump to remove reliance on external power. Air supply to the APU is either from an actuated door, as on the B737, or through a permanently open inlet, often at the base of the fin. It is usually started by a small electric starter motor powered from the aircraft's main batteries. Occasionally a dedicated APU battery is fitted. The unit is usually located in the rear fuselage so that its exhaust presents no danger to passengers, crew and ground staff. 


This photograph shows a typical APU installation. 

Gas Turbine Handling 
APUs continued 
Although the APU's generator's output is usually much less than any of the main engine driven generators it can be paralleled with them and is sufficiently powerful to meet the demands on the essential AC Busbar. 
Most AP Us may only be started below 25 000 ft. However, once started some units can operate up to 40 000 ft. Like all gas turbines, the power reduces with altitude. Some units are not cleared for air start (e.g. 8747). 
Apart from starting and shut-down, APU operation is almost entirely automatic. The engine is automatically protected from overloading. Internal sensors monitor the unit and will shut it down in the event of: 
• 
Fire warning . 

• 
Excessive exhaust gas temperature . 

• 
Low oil pressure . 

• 
High oil temperature . 

• 
Airspeed and/or altitude limits are exceeded . 

• 
APU overspeed ( 110% ) . 

• 
High bleed air temperature . 



Auxiliary power unit (APU)  Free power turbine  Drive to gearbox to operate 115v 3 phase 400 Hz  
AC generator  

Bleed air valve pneumatics for engine starting & air conditioning pressurisation 
Exhaust 

APUs may also have an external control panel, complete with 
warning horn, to allow ground crew to shut down the unit from 
outside the flight deck, and to activate the fire extinguisher if 
needed. 


Lesson 42 
Propellor Systems 

AGK 42 
Propellor Systems 
ft+IH+-lo 
Propellers 
The purpose of a propeller is to convert engine power into thrust. Turbojets deliver thrust by accelerating a small mass of air to very high speeds but propellers do so by accelerating a larger mass of air to lower speeds, and this makes a propeller driven aircraft more efficient at providing thrust at lower speeds and medium altitudes than turbojets. Propellers can be mounted either as pusher or tractor propellers, occasionally both. 


Propellor Systems 
ft.ii+lo 
Reduction Gearboxes 
Most aircraft piston engines operate at comparatively low speeds, often less than 2500 RPM. Under these circumstances the propeller can be driven directly from the engine. Turboprop engines, however, turn at much higher speeds, typically 10 000-15 000 RPM, speeds that are so high that, ifthe engine was directly linked to the propeller, most of the blade would be supersonic, and the centrifugal forces would tear the blades from the hub. Consequently turboprops and a few pistons use a reduction gearbox to drop the propeller RPM down to manageable speeds. The gearbox is usually shaft driven and uses epicyclic gears to effectively transmit the torque whilst reducing the RPM. 
Gas turbine engine
Torque shaft 


Propellor Systems 
ft+it+lo 
The Combined Airflow 
A propeller blade can be considered as a small rotating wing producing lift in exactly the same way as does an aircraft wing. This can be seen clearly ifwe cut a slice through a propeller blade and look at the aerodynamics. 
This section of the blade has a rotational velocity, a product of the propeller RPM and the radius at the place where we cut the slice. It is also moving forward through the air at a speed that is the sum of the aircraft speed, TAS, and the airflow induced through the propeller disc. Together these determine the relative airflow past the blade. 
If the blade is to develop any lift to pull the aircraft forward it must have an angle of attack. It will work most efficiently if alpha is at about 4°, for best lift/drag ratio, and give maximum thrust at critical alpha just before the stall. 

Propellor Systems 
Thrust and Torque Forces 

The principal forces on the propeller are as shown here. The total reaction force on the aerofoil acts out of the cambered side of the blade, called the thrust face, and is split into two components. These are thrust, which acts at 90° to the plane of rotation and propeller torque, which is parallel to the rotational plane. Propeller torque normally opposes engine torque. Propeller torque is sometimes referred to as the drag of the propeller. If engine torque is equal to propellor torque (drag), then the propellor speed is constant. 

Propellor Systems 
ft.ii+lo 
Blade Twist 
The chord of the blade is set at an angle to the plane of rotation, this is called the blade angle or pitch angle. If the blade angle is large the propeller is said to have a coarse pitch if the angle is small it has a fine pitch. 
Since the rotational velocity on any part of the blade is a function ofthe radius ofthe propeller at that point it follows that, if all sections of the blade are to have the same alpha, the blade must be twisted along its longitudinal axis. The convention is that the blade angle is measured three quarters ofthe way along the blade. 
Not only does the blade need to be twisted, it also needs to be thickened towards the root. There are two reasons for this, one is that the root carries the heaviest loads and needs to be strongest, the other is that the blade requires a high speed aerofoil section where rotational velocity is greatest but, at the root a fatter, low speed profile, is more efficient. 


Propellor Systems 
ft.Hflo 
The Effect of Forward Speed 
lfwe now look at the effect of changing forward speed, TAS, on a fixed pitch propeller at constant RPM, we see that at low speed alpha will be large and at high speed alpha will be small. There will be a speed where alpha will be optimum, about+ 4°. On a fixed pitch propeller the blade angle is selected to provide this optimum condition at the aircraft's normal cruise speed. 
A fixed pitch propeller is simple to construct and to use and is popular on basic aircraft and trainers. A fixed pitch propeller, however, can have only one optimum combination of forward airspeed and engine RPM. At all other combinations it operates less efficiently. 


Propellor Systems 
ft+H+lo 
Variable Pitch Propellers 
Two Pitch Systems 
The early solution to this problem used a two-pitch system where the propeller blade pitch could be set fine for take-off to allow maximum engine RPM, and then selected to coarse pitch for higher speeds. In preparation for landing the propeller was again selected to fine pitch for low speed flight and to allow maximum engine power in the event of a go-around. 


Propeller efficiency 
Propellor Systems 
Constant Speed Operation 
Although better than fixed pitch propellers, the two pitch propeller 
still has a large range of speed where maximum efficiency is not 
achieved. An even better solution would be to have a variable 

pitch propeller that continuously maintains the optimum pitch for >, 
(.J the airspeed. C: 
Q)
·c:; 
:E 
Q)
By optimising the angle of attack the propeller will maintain the 
.... 
..!!:!
selected engine RPM. This is called constant speed operation. 
Q) 
c.. 
e 
a. 

Envelope of maximum efficiency 

TAS 

Propellor Systems 
The Full Range of Pitch 
Propeller pitch can also be varied beyond the normal flight range. At one extreme a feather position, at about +85° of pitch, provides minimum drag on a failed engine. At the other extreme a ground range allows a reverse thrust option, provides a ground fine pitch position for easy starting and allows a limited range of ground fine pitch positions for taxiing. 
The range between Flight Fine Pitch (FFP) and feather is called the Alpha range. It incorporates the constant speed range between FFP at, typically, 17° and the flight coarse pitch stop at about 27°. The range from the flight fine pitch stop to full reverse is called the Beta range. The FFP stop is possibly the most critical stop. Using air ground logic circuits and mechanical control stops it prevents the blade from moving into the Beta range in flight. If it failed, particularly on a twin, the excessive asymmetric drag could cause a loss of control. 
ft.Mflo 
The full range of pitch positions 
Feathering stop +85° 
Ground fine pitch stop Reverse thrust stop -15° -------­
Propellor Systems 
Reverse Thrust 
Reverse thrust is primarily used to slow the aircraft on the landing run. Air-ground (weight-on-wheels) logic switches prevent it being selected in the air. 
When reverse is selected, the prop is driven to a large negative blade angle which changes the direction of the thrust component of the total reaction. Although the total reaction and thrust are reversed, propeller torque is not. It still acts in opposition to engine torque and absorbs engine power. 
In the next lesson we will look at typical controls for selecting reverse thrust. 

Propellor Systems 
ATM and CTM -Windmilling 
When the propeller is windmilling, following an engine failure, the reaction becomes drag, not thrust, and the ATM acts with the CTM to naturally fine the blade angle. This tells us that, if nothing else is done, a variable pitch prop will move to the flight fine pitch position after an engine failure. 
Propellor Systems 
Windmilling 
As we have seen, the tendency after an engine failure is for aerodynamic and centrifugal twisting moments to drive the blade to fine pitch which, because of the forward speed, will produce a negative angle of attack. In this case though, unlike the selection of reverse, the change in the direction of the total reaction force will cause the torque drag to act in the direction of rotation of the engine. 
On a single this can be a positive advantage, as a windmilling prop can be used to restart the engine, but on a twin the high asymmetric drag can be make handling difficult. This is why there must be a feathering mechanism provided for the propellers on multi engine aircraft. 
Propellor Systems 
Propeller Control Systems 

On a variable pitch system the propeller is attached to the hub on a bearing assembly which carries the centrifugal loads whilst allowing the propeller to swivel about its own axis. A Pitch Change Mechanism (PCM) is used to adjust the blade angle. 
There are essentially two types of pitch change mechanism, single acting or double acting. In a single-acting PCM oil pressure alters propeller pitch in one direction only and a second device, either a spring, gas pressure or a counterweight, achieves a pitch change in the opposite direction. A double-acting mechanism uses oil pressure to alter the pitch setting in both directions. The delivery of hydraulic pressure is controlled by a Constant Speed Unit (CSU), the combination of CSU and PCM is known as a Pitch Control Unit (PCU). 
Small piston engine aircraft use engine oil to operate the PCM. Larger engines and turboprops normally use hydraulic fluid. For simplicity, for the rest of this chapter the fluid used will be termed as hydraulic oil. 


Propellor Systems 
Double Acting PCM 
A double-acting PCM comprises a piston inside a cylinder. The piston is linked off-centre to the propeller so that its linear motion is translated into a swivelling movement at the blade root. By selectively directing oil pressure to either side of the piston, the pitch ofthe propeller can be altered. 
This diagram shows the arrangement. Oil pressure applied to the side of the piston coloured blue would move it backwards, pressure applied to the side coloured purple would move it forwards. Ifthere was a loss of hydraulic pressure with this arrangement then the CTM would drive the blade slowly towards fine pitch, a high frontal drag position. 
Propellor Systems 

Single Acting PCM 
Single Acting PCMs have hydraulic fluid driving the blade in one direction only with a force from one or more alternative sources acting in the opposite direction. On both singles and twins counterweights provide one of the forces. The weights tend to be flung outwards and coarsen a rotating propeller but have no effect on a stationary one. Counterweights are not found with double acting PCMs. 
Counterweight 
moves propeller to Coarse Pitch 

Propellor Systems 
Multi-Engine and Single-Engine Aircraft Differences Multi-Engine Aircraft 
In a single-acting system on a twin-engine aircraft oil pressure at the front of the piston drives the propeller to fine pitch against the pressure of a strong spring, as in this diagram, or the coarsening effect of the counterweights. When an increase in pitch is required the oil pressure is released and spring pressure and the force from the counterweights start to coarsen the blade. 
If the oil pressure fails and the prop keeps rotating both the spring and the weights will drive the propeller to the position for minimum drag, fully coarse. If the engine stops the spring will act on its own in the same direction. 
Single-Engine Aircraft 
The variable pitch propeller on a single-engine aircraft is likely to be arranged differently, with a light spring acting with the oil pressure to fine the prop and the counterweights acting to coarsen it. This means that, if the oil pressure fails but the engine is still running, the props will still be driven to the min drag position, coarse, but, if the propeller and engine stop, the spring pressure will drive the prop to fine, the best position to windmill for a re­start. 
Propellor Systems 
Centrifugal Latch (Low Pitch Stop) 
On a twin engine aircraft, when the engine is shut down on the ground, the spring will naturally tend to drive the propeller to the fully coarse or feathered position as oil pressure leaks away. The difficulty with this is that a fully feathered propeller would impose unacceptable loads on the starter motor during the next start. To overcome this a centrifugal latch or low pitch stop is fitted to prevent the pitch control piston from moving to the feathered position on shutdown. 
This diagram shows a detail of the low pitch stop. At normal operating speeds the weights, also visible in the diagram, draw the latch out and allow free movement of the piston. As the engine speed falls below about 1000 RPM on shutdown a spring pushes out a latch to lock the PCM in fine pitch. 
Although this system helps on the ground it does mean that, if you are operating aircraft with a low pitch stop and you have an engine failure, you must select 'feather' before the RPM decays. 
Propellor Systems 
Constant Speed Units 
A PCM is powered by high pressure hydraulic oil from a CSU. The primary function of the CSU is to maintain the propeller RPM, and therefore the engine RPM, at the level demanded by the RPM control lever. It achieves this by sensing propeller RPM and then adjusting the pitch of the propeller to increase or decrease the amount of torque drag that the propeller is producing. 
The CSU has a simple rule: 
¦ 
If propeller RPM falls the CSU will cause the propeller blades to move to a finer pitch. 

¦ 
If propeller RPM rises the CSU will cause the propeller blades to move to a coarser pitch. 



This automatic RPM control means, for instance, that the engine power can be increased, which would naturally cause the RPM to increase, but the tendency to increase RPM causes the PCU to coarsen the blade angle. Thus an increase in power, power lever forward, leads to no overall change in RPM but a coarser blade angle. This also works in reverse a decrease in power leads to a finer blade angle. 
The PCU must also select the blade angle demanded for feather, air start, ground idling or reverse thrust. 

Propellor Systems 
CSU Operation 
The principal control element in the CSU is a spool valve, or landed valve, whose position is normally governed by propeller RPM. The landed valve will direct oil to the fine pitch or to the coarse pitch side of the pitch control piston, or to neither. 
Pressurised oil is supplied to one side of the valve by a gear type booster pump. This, and the governor, is driven by the engine. As the engine is directly connected to the propeller the drive RPM is proportional to propeller RPM. 
Increasing RPM will throw the flyweights out, lifting the valve against the spring, and decreasing RPM will allow the spring to take control and move the valve down. This diagram shows the arrangement. 
During constant speed operation of the propeller the CSU will be in one of three operating conditions: 
¦ 
On Speed 

¦ 
Over Speed 

¦ 
Under Speed 



Propellor Systems 

On Speed 
When the propeller RPM is exactly right the governor sets the valve so fluid cannot go to either side of the PCU piston. The pitch of the propeller is now fixed and the PCM is hydraulically locked. This is the position shown here. 

Propellor Systems 
Over Speed 
If engine RPM started to increase the governor flyweights would move outwards and raise the landed valve against the pressure from the spring. As the valve moves oil is directed to the coarse pitch side ofthe PCM and, simultaneously, the return line from the fine pitch side of the piston to the low-pressure engine oil system is opened. The propeller moves to a coarser pitch, propeller torque is increased and the engine decelerates back to the on­speed condition. As it does, the landed valve moves back to the on-speed position. 
The movement from fine to coarse pitch is more difficult than from coarse to fine because of the having to overcome the dominating CTM acting on the blades. 
Propellor Systems 

Under Speed 
If propeller torque becomes greater than engine torque, RPM will decrease. The governor flyweights exert less centrifugal force and move inwards and the landed valve moves downwards under spring pressure. This directs oil to the fine pitch side of the pitch change piston and opens the return line from the coarse pitch side of the piston to the low-pressure engine oil system. The propeller moves to a finer pitch and the engine accelerates back to on­speed. 


Propellor Systems 
Feathering 
In a modern aircraft with either single or double acting systems feather selection is initiated by pulling the RPM lever fully backwards. The lever is moved through the fully coarse position into a guarded feather position. Note that this selection does not necessarily stop the engine this action may need to be carried out separately as part of the full feathering drill to prevent excessive loads on the engine as the propeller blade moves to this very coarse pitch. Some aircraft engines have a different controlling system called a single lever control. A condition lever is used to select the engine on, off and to feather. The lever is also moved backwards to select feather. 
On a free power turbine turboprop engine feather can be selected with the engine still running as there is no mechanical connection between the engine and propeller. 
In a single acting system feathering can be achieved by opening the PCM oil line to drain, allowing the spring and counterweights to feather the propeller no other operating force is required. Don't forget the centrifugal latches, however, if you have a single acting system with a feathering spring you still have to actually select feather before the RPM falls below the critical value. 
\ 
Propellor Systems 
Feathering (continued) 

In double-acting systems feathering requires that pressure oil be fed to the coarse pitch side of the PCM piston and the fine pitch oil to drain. This can be done in one of two ways. 
¦ The CSU control valve can be physically lifted by a cockpit control when selected to feather to override the governor and put the valve in the coarse pitch position. 
Finer
¦ Feather selection energises solenoid operated valves which 
pitch
direct high-pressure oil to hydraulically position the CSU 
spool valve. 
The two methods of selection can work together to ensure selection. 
Loss of engine oil or loss of oil pressure may be the reason that feathering is required, and to safeguard the system there will be an electrically driven feathering pump which is switched on when feather is selected to boost oil pressure. There may also be a separate reservoir of oil for the feathering system. When the propeller reaches the fully feathered position oil pressure starts to rise. A pressure cut-out switch then activates to switch off the pump. 




Propellor Systems 

Unfeathering 

By unfeathering a propeller in flight, the pilot can cause it to windmill. This selection of windmilling is controlled and expected by the pilot and will rotate the engine fast enough for a re-start Coarser 
pitch 
attempt. This is the usual method of re-starting an engine in flight. 
The problem is that, with the engine stopped, there is no oil pressure that can be used to drive the propeller away from the feathered position. On simple systems an unfeathering accumulator is linked to the CSU. The accumulator is permanently charged while the engine is running and is protected by a non-return valve. When the engine is shut down oil pressure is lost and the NRV shuts, trapping oil under pressure in the accumulator. A solenoid valve operated by the unfeathering switch opens to allow the pressurised oil to the landed valve. Provided this valve has first been set back into the constant speed range, oil will flow to the fine pitch side of the piston as it would for any underspeed condition. In complex systems unfeathering is carried out like feathering by using an independent electrically operated pump to supply oil pressure. 


Finer p" ch 
Propellor Systems 
Automatic Feathering 
To make sure the propeller of a failed engine is promptly feathered in low speed high thrust situations such as take-off and go-around some aircraft are fitted with an automatic feathering system, called auto feather for short. 
Where fitted auto feather is only used during take off and landing. When an engine fails a torque switch senses the loss of power delivered to the propeller. As the torque falls below a pre-set value the switch activates the feathering system. 
The position of the power lever is used to arm the auto feather circuit. 
Propellor Systems 
Automatic Feathering 
To make sure the propeller of a failed engine is promptly feathered in low speed high thrust situations such as take-off and go-around some aircraft are fitted with an automatic feathering system, called auto feather for short. 
Where fitted auto feather is only used during take off and landing. When an engine fails a torque switch senses the loss of power delivered to the propeller. As the torque falls below a pre-set value the switch activates the feathering system. 
The position of the power lever is used to arm the auto feather circuit. 



Lesson 43 
Propeller Control Systems 

AGK43 
Propeller Control Systems 
Control Levers 
Two Lever Systems 
In a two lever system engine power is controlled by a power lever and propeller RPM by a separate propeller lever. This is the typical set-up for piston engines, where the power lever is the throttle and controls MAP, and the pitch control is the second lever and selects RPM. The two lever system is also used by some turboprops. 
A simple way to understand the functions of the RPM lever and the MAP gauge is to consider the RPM as the gears of a car, and the MAP as the accelerator on a car. To climb a hill in a certain gear requires a certain RPM, achieved through the gearbox, but needs more power, achieved through the accelerator. 
If the propeller has Beta control there is some mixing of the functions in that range. With the propeller control selected to MAX RPM, the power lever is used to select the Beta range. Movement ofthe power lever within this range, overrides the CSU and removes the Alpha range flight fine pitch stop (flight idle), allowing the Beta range blade angles for flight fine, ground fine (ground idle) and reverse to be set. Within this range the power lever is controlling both propeller blade angle and engine power. 
ft+i·N o 

Typical two lever functions for a turboprop are illustrated here. Positions out of the normal flight range are guarded by detents. Note that a selection of the power lever rearwards through flight idle sets the propeller control in the Beta range. Movement forward through flight idle sets the Alpha range this is standard. 
Propeller levers 
Power levers 
Flight idle Min RPM
Ground fine Reverse Feather 

Propeller Control Systems 
Single Lever Systems 
In a single lever system the power lever controls both engine power and propeller RPM. Advancing the power lever schedules more fuel to the engine and selects increased RPM on the propeller governor. Although called a single lever system there is also a second lever called the condition lever. As it name suggests it selects the 'condition' of the engine and propeller. Air Start, Run, Ground Stop and Feather are the conditions in which the engine and propeller can be selected. 
A single lever system is also appropriate for a turboprop engine designed to run at constant RPM. The condition lever is set to 'run' and then power changes can be made by moving the power lever in the flight range. 
If an increase is required the lever is moved forward, the fuel flow to the engine is increased which increases engine torque which tries to increase the RPM. The propeller governor is set to a constant value of RPM. It senses the engine trying to increase speed and coarsens the propeller. This increases propeller thrust and torque and ultimately maintains a constant RPM at a higher power setting. On reducing power the reverse happens and the propeller fines off. Since the engine does not have to accelerate to increase power these constant speed engines are very responsive. 
ft+.H o 

Movement of the power lever into the Beta range operates the engine in the same way as a two lever system. 
Power levers 
Condition levers 




Propeller Control Systems 
Synchronising and Synchrophasing 
Synchronising 
On a multi-engine aircraft very slight differences in propeller RPM can result in a beat frequency noise pattern being established. This results in noise and vibration levels rising and falling rhythmically. To avoid this problem a synchronising unit is fitted. One engine is designated as the master. The synchronising unit compares electrical signals from engine driven generators and electrically trims the other engine speeds to exactly match the master engine. 
Synchrophasing 
A synchrophase unit reduces total noise amplitude by adjusting the synchronised slave engine(s) until propeller blade position or phase is best arranged to reduce the noise. 
The diagram gives the phase pattern for a particular aircraft -a C130 Hercules -with the No.2 engine as the master engine. Notice firstly that synchrophasing is not possible until propeller RPM has been synchronised and secondly that synchronised propellers do not have to hold any specific propeller alignment. The diagram only illustrates the set-up for synchronised propellers giving the worst tip interference. 
ftiiNo 
Synchronised: all same RPM but still noisy 
. ...............,..........,.,.,. ~ 
Synchrophased: all same RPM & phased for minimum noise level 
Propeller Control Systems 
Synchrophasing continued 
The synchrophase unit will hold the propellers in a fixed phase relationship by tweaking their RPM up and down. The phase angles for the C130 with No.2 as master, shown above on the previous page, are No.1 -10° lead, No.3 -20° lag, No.4 -22° lead. 
Synchrophasing reduces noise level along the fuselage, but especially in the area in line with the propellers. This diagram shows a plot of noise level for the C130, with and without synchrophasing. 


C130 -Overall Noise Level 
Propeller Control Systems 
Power Measurement 
With a fixed pitch propeller, RPM provides a reasonable indication of power. Clearly, when a constant speed propeller is used, RPM alone means nothing, so a different measurement is required. Piston engine aircraft normally use MAP and turboprops torque. When you consider the formula Power= torque x 2nn where n = revs/sec, it is easy to see that when RPM is constant, torque has a direct relationship with power. 
Torque Measurement 
Torque is an indication ofthe power output of an engine. One system, based on oil pressure, measures the torque in the reduction gearbox. An alternative, electrical, system measures the torque on the shaft between the engine and the reduction gearbox. 
Torque Measurement Using Oil Pressure 
This diagram shows the arrangement of helical reduction gears, called epicycloidal reducers, in the reduction gearbox. The helical teeth on the gears produce an axial thrust proportional to the torque, which is transmitted by oil pressure to an indicating system. Display may be in PSI or in % torque. 
ft.iH o 

Propeller Torquemeter shaft -+ Axial thrust piston 
¦ 
Engine oil pressure 

¦ 
Torquemeter oil pressure 



Propeller Control Systems 
ft+Wo 
Electrical Torque Measurement 
Most modern engines use an electrical torque meter. Torque is detected by two concentric shafts. One, the drive or torque shaft, transmits the torque from the engine to the gearbox while the 

Torque second is only connected at one end, at the engine. meter assembly 
Each shaft has a serrated ring gear fitted which, during operation, rotates past a magnetic pickup and induces an AC voltage. We have already seen these 'phonic wheel' arrangements to read I AC output RPM. Here we have two together. As output torque is increased the torque shaft physically twists as it drives the gearbox. This F.:c(ill changes the position of its serrated ring gear in relation to that of ~ 

phase relation
the reference shaft and produces a difference in the phase 
Torque
relationship of the voltages produced. 
pick-up 
The indicating system measures the change in phase relationship, computes the value oftorque produced and displays it on a cockpit gauge. 
Torque shaft and exciter wheel 
Reference shaft and exciter wheel 
Propeller Control Systems 
Propeller Checks after Engine Start 
The following describes the checking of the constant speed operation of the propeller with a two lever control system on a piston engine aircraft: 
The optimum blade position for engine start is at a fine pitch, so there is minimal drag from the blades on rotation. This could be indicated as 'max RPM' or 'High RPM'. 
The engine should be allowed to idle for a minute to warm the oil before changing the propeller pitch. If Beta control is fitted these can be selected and checked for correct values of RPM and torque during taxi. 
ft+Wo 

The RPM is noted with the throttle at idle and the propeller control lever set to MAX RPM. The throttle is opened with the propeller still selected to MAX RPM. The propeller will be on the fine pitch stop and act just like a fixed pitch propeller. As the throttle is opened RPM will increase and a value of approximately 2000 RPM is set and noted. With the RPM stable the propeller control lever is slowly moved towards the MIN RPM position and the RPM gauge monitored. Movement of the lever will coarsen the propeller and as engine torque has not been altered the RPM will reduce. Control movement is stopped when the RPM is approximately 1500 RPM. The propeller lever is then moved back to the MAX RPM position and the RPM should return to the previously noted value around 2000 RPM as the propeller pitch reduces back to the fine pitch stop. 
The throttle is then closed to the idle position and the RPM should be as initially noted. 






